THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
CHAPTER EIGHT
The Climax
of Influence
SCENE 12
Finger on the Button
The woman said goodnight and closed the door to her young daughter's
bedroom. Going into her own room, she undressed, put on her
dressing-gown and went downstairs to pour herself a coffee. Her
partner was out, the house was quiet, and she had at least two
wonderful, peaceful hours entirely to herself. She switched on the
television, picked up a magazine, and began idly flicking through the
pages. Bliss.
Fifteen minutes passed, the television just a quiet noise in the
background. For all the attention she gave it, the magazine, too, might
as well have been in the background. The occasional image or headline
caught her eye as she mechanically turned the pages, but essentially she
was lost in her own thoughts — like butterflies, dancing around in her
head, chasing each other in and out of her mind.
She wasn't sure which came first, the thought that she could, or the
tingle between her legs that told her she should. But suddenly the idea
was there. It would be nice, but could she be bothered? A few more
minutes went by. She put down the magazine and stared at the fire.
Maybe she would. Even having decided, she waited until she had
drunk the last of her now cool
coffee. On her way upstairs she took the phone off the hook. Quietly,
she walked past her daughter's bedroom to her own, and bolted the
door.
For a moment, she toyed with the idea of doing something different this
time. Maybe she would look at the pictures she had secreted away, but
she couldn't quite remember where they were. Maybe she would put
something in her vagina, but she couldn't think of anything quickly to
hand. Two or three years ago, she had used the handle of her partner's
table tennis bat, but then had spent days imagining splinters and germs.
One day, she would buy herself a vibrator, if she could only think of
somewhere to hide it. In the end she decided not to bother with
anything and simply to follow her usual routine. Lying down on the
bed, she untied the belt of her dressing-gown so that it fell open. Her
left hand went across to her right nipple. Her right hand went first to
her mouth to collect saliva on her fingers, then down between her legs
to her clitoris. She began to masturbate.
At first, she had difficulty focusing on her sensations. Other, random,
non-sexual thoughts kept intruding. She tried several fantasies. Old
favourites like being undressed, licked and caressed by another woman
or being worked on by two men got her started, but didn't take her very
far. Then, after about five minutes of stimulation, a fantasy scene with
a friend and her partner finally started her sensations buzzing.
Lubricant was spreading over her genitals and her fingers. Her
breathing grew heavier and her heart began to race. The images had
now gone and her focus was entirely on the sensation between her
legs, under her moving fingers. As she massaged her clitoris more and
more vigorously, first this way, then that, first with this rhythm, then
with that, she felt the flush spreading over her chest, throat and face.
Her body tensed, poised on the brink. Just one more touch of her
moist, swollen clitoris, and she was there. In silent climax, her thighs
and genitals spasmed, quickly at first, then at increasingly long
intervals. Finally, she relaxed. It was done. Not bad, she thought.
Maybe 7 out of 10. After lying on the bed in post-climactic torpor for a
few
184 185SPERM WARS
minutes, she stood up and re-belted her dressing-gown. Downstairs,
she put the phone back on the hook, poured herself a glass of milk and
returned to the warmth of the sitting-room and the drone of the
television. Warming herself in front of the fire, she tried to remember
the last time she had masturbated. It didn't happen that often, perhaps
only three or four times a month. Maybe the last time was about ten
days ago. When she did masturbate, the orgasm was usually fairly
good. Certainly better than any her partner gave her. Occasionally, he
could give her a 5 out of 10 with his hands, but with his penis it was
usually about 2 out of 10. Actually, it was usually 0 out of 10 because
she rarely climaxed during intercourse.
Masturbation had first added sexual colour to her life in her late
teens. At first, her orgasms were pathetic, the merest tingles. She
scarcely knew when she had climaxed — 1 out of 10 at the most. By
the time she was twenty, however, she was often hitting 7.
Her partner didn't know she masturbated. In fact, the only person
who did know was the woman who, with her partner, had just starred
in her fantasy. They had been friends for years, having met long
before they had each met their respective partners. In one drunken
conversation when they were twenty they had talked about
masturbation. She had felt quite daring when she admitted that yes,
she did 'sometimes', but was then totally deflated when her friend
announced that recently she had been masturbating virtually every
night. If she didn't, she claimed, it was difficult to sleep. This had
seemed particularly surprising because at the time her friend had been
suffering from a prolonged bout of cystitis. The disease had invaded
her left kidney and was proving difficult to shift.
For a week after that conversation, she had attempted to emulate
her friend and masturbated every night. However, two nights in a row
seemed to be her limit. Even then, the second night was hard work.
Quickly, she had reverted to the once a week or so that came
naturally.
186
THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
When her partner returned from his night out, she was curled up on
the settee, watching television. They exchanged pleasantries and after
a while began to prepare for bed. As they lay down, she felt like
intercourse. The thought of a penis inside her was mildly appealing.
She tried a half-hearted flirtation but her partner responded with that
edge of irritability which by now she knew meant 'no chance'. Mentally
shrugging, she turned away from him and within minutes was asleep.
f all aspects of human sexuality, the female orgasm has
probably been the most enigmatic. Women differ considerably
in their experiences (Scene 36). Some never have an orgasm. Others
have orgasms but never during intercourse. Yet others have an orgasm
nearly every time they have intercourse. Although clearly a sexual
phenomenon, the female orgasm (unlike male ejaculation) is not
necessary for conception. Women who never orgasm readily
conceive.
Variability is one of the major problems in discussing the female
orgasm. Every orgasm is a bit like every other orgasm, a bit like most
other orgasms, and a bit like no other orgasm. Moreover, no two
women have precisely the same range, frequency and pattern of
orgasm. Women differ far more than men over when, how and how
often they climax.
The five scenes in this chapter explore the ways in which orgasm
and — equally importantly — the avoidance of orgasm can enhance a
woman's reproductive success. Each scene illustrates a situation which
will be very familiar to some women, and totally beyond the
experience of others. In each situation, the function of orgasm will be
the same for all women who orgasm in that particular situation. But
when and how often they make use of that function will differ from
woman to woman — for very good reason. These differences between
women are extremely interesting and in Scene 36 we shall discuss
them in their own right. In these five scenes, though, we are
concerned primarily with the way that orgasm has a different
influence
187
OSPERM WARS
on a woman's reproductive success depending on the situation in
which it occurs.
In some ways, it is difficult to see any function in a piece of
behaviour that is so variable and unpredictable — which is why many
people have concluded that there is no function to orgasm other than
that of giving pleasure. But as we have already seen, pleasure is not in
itself a function (Scene 10), but a by-product of function. Basically,
whenever the body is intent upon a particular course of action, it
generates an urge to perform that action. As that urge is gratified, the
sensation generated is pleasure. The female orgasm is pleasurable
because it has a function. A woman feels like an orgasm whenever
her body judges it will enhance her reproductive success. When her
body judges it will reduce her reproductive success, she feels no such
urge. We begin, perhaps surprisingly, not with orgasms associated
with intercourse (Scenes 24 to 26) but with orgasms generated by
masturbation.
Nearly 80 per cent of women masturbate to orgasm at some stage
in their lives and for most, like the woman in the scene, it is a routine
but not very frequent activity. The average rate of masturbation is
just under once per week — slightly higher in the week or so before
ovulation, slightly lower at other times. A woman is also more likely
to masturbate, and to masturbate more often, as she gets older, at
least up to the age of forty.
The commonest method of female masturbation is to stimulate the
clitoris, usually with just the fingers. Sometimes fingers are pushed
into the vagina but this is most often a complement to clitoral
stimulation, not a replacement. On occasion, a penis substitute may
be inserted in the vagina-again, as a complement to clitoral massage.
In different cultures, objects as diverse as reindeer muscle, fruit,
vegetables and commercial vibrators may be used as masturbation
aids. Women have even been known to recruit a cat or dog to lick
their genitals during masturbation. Even more rarely, a woman may
allow a dog or some other animal to have intercourse, again as a form
of masturbation.
Because of the confusion that has surrounded the function of
THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
the female orgasm, similar confusion has surrounded the role of the
clitoris. This organ develops in the female foetus from the same cells
as does the penis in the male foetus. All female mammals have a
clitoris, the tip (or 'bulb') of which contains many nerve endings and
is very sensitive — more sensitive, in fact, than the tip of the penis.
In some monkeys, mainly those from South America, the clitoris is
as large if not larger than the penis. Often, it is also grooved and
carries urine away from the female's body during urination, much as
the penis does in males. Such large clitorises could play an active role
in intercourse. They are not stimulated directly as a male thrusts,
because the rear-entry position usual for primates means that the
clitoris is forward of the point where the penis enters the vagina.
Nevertheless, because of its size, the clitoris is relatively easy for both
the male and the female to find and handle during intercourse. This is
very different from the situation in most other monkeys, as well as in
apes and humans, in which the clitoris is much smaller than the penis
and is often concealed in folds of skin.
Inevitably, a small clitoris is even less likely to be stimulated
during rear-entry intercourse. Even species which sometimes couple
frontally (some monkeys, orang-utans, chimpanzees, gorillas and of
course humans) do not necessarily stimulate the clitoris during
intercourse. In fact, in such species the clitoris is so cunningly
positioned that it actually seems designed not to be automatically
stimulated by intercourse. Moreover, small, semi- or totally concealed
clitorises are difficult for a male to find. The overriding impression,
therefore, is that a small, concealed clitoris like that of a woman is
primarily a push-button for self-masturbation — not an organ for
automatic involvement in intercourse (Scene 25).
Women are not the only female mammals to masturbate. Many
other primates have been seen stimulating their clitorises, either with
their hands or by rubbing their vulvas on the ground or on branches.
Chimpanzees have been seen inserting leafy twigs in their vaginas,
then brushing them against vertical
188 189SPERM WARS
objects, causing vibration. Nor is female masturbation only found in
primates. Female porcupines have been seen to stand astride a stick
then run, causing the stick to vibrate and so stimulate the clitoris.
Anecdotes apart, we know relatively little about female
masturbation and orgasm in species other than humans, though we do
know that a female chimp will climax if someone massages her
clitoris. Moreover, once the chimp has discovered this substitute for
masturbation, she will periodically solicit clitoral massage by
presenting her rear-end to the person's hand. A cow also will climax
if someone massages her clitoris. A few minutes after massage
begins, the cow's cervix is seen to gape open and move.
The same cervical movements are seen following clitoral
stimulation in humans. Film taken by a tiny camera placed inside the
vagina of a masturbating woman shows that when she climaxes, her
cervix also gapes, dipping into the vagina at the same time. This
gaping and dipping is sometimes called 'tenting' and may happen
several times during the course of a single climax. Orgasmic tenting
of the cervix, combined with climactic events inside the cervix itself,
are the key to the function of masturbation, for they have three main
consequences.
First, masturbation (via orgasmic tenting and so on) temporarily
increases the flow of mucus from the cervix into the vagina. Mucus
flows slowly from the cervix all the time, but orgasm speeds it up —
almost equivalent to the difference between a 'runny' nose and
sneezing. When a woman becomes sexually aroused during
masturbation, glands at the top of her cervix increase their rate of
mucus production, particularly if she climaxes. This quickly increases
the size of the mucus 'glacier' flowing through her cervix (Scene 3).
At first, this is accommodated by the tenting cervix. Then, when
tenting ceases, a part of the older section of the enlarged glacier is
squeezed into the vagina, like toothpaste out of a tube. This flood of
mucus lines her vaginal walls, laying down a thick film of lubricant
ready for her next intercourse (Scene 3). This
THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
shedding of mucus, however, does more than simply enhance vaginal
lubrication. Because it is the oldest section of mucus that is ejected, it
carries with it much of the cervical debris, including old blocker
sperm and disease organisms. This is an effective way of fighting
infection. In Scene 22 the woman's friend was driven to masturbate
nightly during an episode of urinogenital infection.
Secondly, masturbation increases the acidity of the cervical mucus.
When a woman's cervix tents, the mucus inside stretches sideways.
New channels form through the mucus and at the same time material
from the top of the vagina is effectively 'sucked' into the tip of the
'elephant's trunk' of the cervix (Scene 3). The fluids at the top of the
vagina are very acidic, and as the cervix tents several times during the
course of the climax, acid spreads through the mucus channels
making the older portion of the cervical glacier more acidic than it
was before. When the climax ends, part of this acidic mucus (plus any
disease organisms it contains) will be ejected back into the vagina as
described above, but some will remain in the cervix. Neither sperm
nor bacteria function properly in acidic mucus. For a while after
masturbation, therefore, and maybe even for days, sperm are less able
to swim through the mucus channels and disease organisms are less
able to invade and multiply.
Thirdly, masturbation changes the strength of a woman's cervical
filter — most often strengthening it. This is due not only to the
increase in acidity we have just discussed but also to orgasm
triggering about half of the cervical crypts (Scene 4) to void their load
of sperm from the last insemination. This strengthens the filter
because these sperm, on re-entering the mucus, block new mucus
channels. Moreover, because many of these new blockers are high up
in the cervix, their influence may last for days — persisting until the
cervical glacier carries them down into the vagina. Sometimes,
masturbation does not increase the strength of the filter. The critical
factor seems to be how many of her cervical crypts still contain
sperm.
The more crypts that contain sperm when a woman climaxes,
190 191SPERM WARS THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
the more are injected into the mucus channels and the stronger her
resulting filter. Consequently, masturbation twenty-four hours after
intercourse, when many crypts contain sperm, strengthens the filter
more than masturbation forty-eight hours after intercourse, when
fewer crypts contain sperm, and so on. As long as enough crypts still
contain sperm, a second masturbation a day or so after the first
strengthens the filter still further, but a third or fourth usually has no
additional effect. Presumably, after the second masturbation, few if
any crypts contain sperm. Similarly, if the crypts are empty of sperm
for other reasons (because, for example, it is more than eight days
since last intercourse or the couple used a cap or condom at the
previous intercourse), masturbation again does not strengthen the
cervical filter.
We have already noted the tendency for a woman to feel like
masturbating more often during the fertile phase of her cycle than at
other times. This now makes sense — this is precisely the time when
she has most to gain from preparing her vaginal lubricant and cervical
filter for intercourse. All the same, she may still feel the urge to
masturbate at other times. Of course, even during infertile phases she
still needs to combat disease, prepare her vagina for intercourse and
adjust her cervical filter. She also still needs to confuse her partner
(Scenes 23 and 26).
Masturbation is not the only way a woman can combat disease and
prepare for her next insemination via orgasm. There is another way,
not as common as masturbation, but experienced by a number of
women. This source of orgasms is the subject of Scene 23.
SCENE 23
Dark Secret
The purple haze hanging in the air seemed quite natural, as the
woman walked around the supermarket. She was alone. Ahead of her,
stretching for miles into the distance, the meat aisle was completely
empty of people. She went slowly past the beef, then even more slowly
past the chicken, idly wondering what to cook that evening. Just
beyond the bacon she stopped by a big display of grinning pigs' heads.
This section was refrigerated and should be ice cold. So why was she
so hot?
For a while she stood with her legs apart, trying to let cool air
reach her hot, tingling groin. No sooner had she thought of taking off
her knickers than it was done, and they were hanging over the front of
her trolley. An attractive woman in shop assistant's uniform suddenly
appeared in front of her. Picking the underwear off the trolley, the
assistant held them in the air.
'Why did you take these out of their pack?' she asked.
'I didn't, they're mine. I was hot, so I took them off.'
The assistant looked at the knickers, then pressed them to her face.
'Mmm, I like the smell,' she said, her beautiful eyes peering at the
woman over the flimsy garment which she still held over her nose
and mouth.
'If they're yours, you won't be wearing anything under that skirt,
will you?' she said. She breathed deeply through the woman's
knickers a few more times, then continued, 'And you will smell just
like this.' She dropped the knickers. Let me see if they're yours. Lift
your dress and let me smell you.'
The woman refused and backed away. As if from nowhere, a
crowd gathered. Standing in a semicircle with the assistant at
192 193SPERM WARS
the front, they began to hem her in. She tried to back away still
further, but found herself against a wall. A man in the crowd came
forward, pushed himself behind her and pinned her arms so that she
couldn't move. Her heart was beginning to race and she was having
difficulty breathing. She tried to speak, but the man put his hand on
her throat.
The assistant began to undress, handing first her uniform then, one
by one, her other garments to someone in the crowd. Her still
beautiful but now demonic gaze never strayed from the woman's eyes
as she gradually revealed more and more of her body. The woman
startled and the crowd gasped as she took off the last of her clothes.
Her top half was that of a beautiful woman, with perfect breasts. But
her bottom half was that of a man — a very excited man.
The naked hermaphrodite stepped towards her. As it did so, the
crowd began to chant, 'Rape her!' The woman tried to struggle but
the man still held her tightly. In one movement, the hermaphrodite
tore off the woman's dress and pressed itself against her — breasts
against breasts, penis against groin. The beautiful female face began
to kiss her passionately as the crowd's chants grew louder. The
woman tried to struggle, rocking from side to side. Every so often a
tiny noise escaped her throat as she tried to scream. She was going to
be raped.
After kissing her hard on the lips, the face moved down and began
to bite her nipples. More sounds escaped as the woman struggled still
harder. Her heart felt as though it was going to jump out of her body.
The face left her nipples and began to lick its way over her belly
towards her groin. Then, just as it was about to give her oral sex, she
climaxed. In the middle of her contractions, she woke up.
As she surfaced from her sleep, the woman briefly registered what
had happened. It was a month since she had last climaxed at night. In
fact, it was probably a month since she had last climaxed on her own
at all. This had been a good one — 9 out of 10, she thought. She
looked sideways at her snoring partner,
THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
then turned over. As her body made its descent back to normal, she
drifted back into sleep.
e have already discussed the ways in which 'wet dreams' are
important in a man's battle for reproductive success (Scene
14). Here, we consider whether nocturnal orgasms are equally
important for women.
Although all women have sex dreams, not all women have
nocturnal orgasms. By the age of twenty, only about 10 per cent have
ever experienced a 'nocturnal'. Some may have their first as late as the
age of forty. The majority of women, however, never experience (or
at least remember) such an orgasm. Over a lifetime, only about 40 per
cent will ever share the experience of the woman in the scene, but for
those who do, nocturnal orgasms will be an important part of their
sexuality. In fact, for the women who have them, nocturnals usually
produce the strongest climaxes of all. Sometimes, though, the
momentary waking up just at climax can prevent them from being as
satisfying as a masturbatory orgasm can be.
Nocturnal orgasms are nearly always associated with dreams,
although these dreams are not always sexual. Even when they are, the
sexual element sometimes makes only a last-minute entrance into the
dream. Often it seems that the impending orgasm triggers the sex
dream, rather than the other way round. In the dream just recounted,
the woman was sexually aroused even before she met the shop
assistant. The climax was already on its way and the dream was
manufactured by her brain simply to accompany her body's build-up.
It is unusual to dream of hermaphrodites. Most often, people dream of
situations that reflect their own usual sexual activity, though lesbian
scenes for women who have never had a lesbian relationship are
relatively common — more common than homosexual scenes for
heterosexual men.
Women are not the only female mammals that climax spontaneously in their sleep, though information for other species
194 195
WSPERM WARS THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
is scarce. The clearest observations are of female dogs. When
bitches on heat are asleep, they occasionally become very agitated,
presumably dreaming. On some of these occasions, mucus wets their
vaginas and they have rhythmic contractions of their genitals, just
like women.
The functions of nocturnal orgasms seem to be identical to those
of masturbatory ones. Both types help a woman's body in its battle
against infection. Both prepare her vagina for its next intercourse by
depositing lubricant. And both strengthen her cervical filter, as long
as there are sperm in her cervical crypts. In fact, no physiological
differences can be detected between the two types of orgasm. Not
surprisingly, therefore, nocturnals show a link with the menstrual
cycle similar to that shown by masturbatory orgasms.
In the same way that female dogs are more likely to have
nocturnals when on heat, women are more likely to have nocturnals
during, or at least at the beginning of, their fertile phase. The most
likely time is about a week before ovulation — precisely when all of
the benefits of nocturnal and masturbatory orgasms are greatest. This
peak more or less coincides with the timing of the peak urge to
masturbate, but is more clear-cut for nocturnals. Women who use the
contraceptive pill show no such peak in the menstrual cycle for
either type of orgasm. This indicates that nocturnals and the urge to
masturbate are largely under hormonal control.
A consequence of this link between ovulation and the timing of
nocturnals and masturbation is that these two types of orgasm have a
seasonal peak. As we have already seen, because women are more
likely to ovulate in some months of the year than others, humans are
more likely to be born in some months than others (Scene 15). As
nocturnals and masturbation are more likely to occur in the week or
so before a woman ovulates, they also are both more likely to occur
in some months than others. For example, in Britain there are peaks
of birth in February/March and September, peaks of ovulation in
May/June and December, and peaks of nocturnals and masturbation
in
196
April/May and again in November. And as in the menstrual cycle,
the peaks are more pronounced for nocturnals than for masturbation.
Although there are no major physiological differences in the
function of nocturnal and masturbatory orgasms, there are some
minor strategic differences. Most of these derive from the relative
ease with which a woman can keep the two types of orgasm a secret
from her partner.
In Scene 14 we concluded that the number of wet dreams
decreases as a male ages and obtains a partner, because wet dreams
are more difficult to hide from a partner than masturbation. The
opposite is probably true for women — nocturnals are less difficult to
hide from a partner than masturbation. In Scene 23, the woman's
partner was asleep when she climaxed. But even if he had been
awake, he still could not have been certain that she was having an
orgasm rather than simply dreaming. In contrast, he could scarcely
have misinterpreted her intentions had he caught her with her hand
between her legs and a banana in her vagina!
It is probably because nocturnals are more cryptic than masturbation that they are also more closely linked to the menstrual
cycle. Given that both types of orgasm are advantageous if they occur
at the beginning of the fertile phase, nocturnals are probably the
better option — being less likely to betray the woman's fertile phase
to her partner. It is probably also because nocturnals are cryptic that
women, unlike men, are more likely to have them as they age and
obtain a partner, not less.
Many women have both types of orgasm, but differ in whether
they have more masturbatory orgasms than nocturnals or vice versa.
Although the triggers and urges for both types are to a large extent
under hormonal control, they are also influenced by external
situations — one of which is potential infidelity (Scenes 6 and 17), as
we shall soon discuss (Scene 26). Together, the two types of orgasm
help a woman's body to give an advantage to the man it would most
like to win sperm warfare. Her body's
197SPERM WARS THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
potential to influence that warfare, however, does not end with
masturbation and nocturnals.
When she is next inseminated, a woman still has a variety of
options. Everything now depends on whether she has an orgasm during
intercourse (Scenes 24 and 25).
SCENE 14
Another Successful Failure
'Did you come?' the man asked, panting, as, propped on his arms, he
held himself above her body.
'Nearly,' she replied, kindly. 'I thought I was going to, but then it
just went and I couldn't get it back.'
The man slowly withdrew, then more or less collapsed by her side.
'I thought you did, just before / came,' he panted, his intonation a
mixture of disappointment and irritation.
'No, not really. But I did enjoy it. It was nice to feel so close.'
The couple relaxed in their usual post-coital embrace and sank
back into their own thoughts. He couldn't see what the problem was.
This time, he had really gone for it. He had taken his time over
foreplay and there was no doubt that she had become excited. Maybe
she wasn't as wet as she could have been, but she was flushed. A few
more seconds playing with her clitoris and she would have come, he
knew she would. It had been putting in his penis that had stopped her.
As he had climbed on top and pushed himself in, she had visibly lost
interest — her excitement level had immediately dropped about
twenty notches. Even then, he had done his best to get her back. He
had thrust as long and as considerately as he could — not too hard,
not too slow. He had delayed as long as he could. Really, though, he
had known they weren't getting anywhere. He could sense
that she was becoming bored and impatient rather than excited. In
the end, he had given up and just concentrated on making himself
ejaculate. It was wishful thinking rather than a lack of awareness that
had made him suggest she had come just before he ejaculated. Or
had he been giving her an opportunity to lie?
As far as he could see, it had to be his partner who had the
problem. A year or so ago he had had a brief affair with a younger
girl. She had come nearly every time. As long as he had given her a
bit of foreplay and as long as he didn't ejaculate too quickly, she
would come. It was as easy as that. His partner, however, rarely
came while he was inside her. Once or twice a month, perhaps — if
he was lucky. But, try as he might, he had totally failed to find any
magic formula. Last time they had had sex, a week ago, just before
her period, she had come. And he had done exactly what he had done
tonight. He had got her excited during foreplay, almost to the point
of coming, entered her quickly, thrust a few times, and she had
come. Tonight, it had failed. Yet, sometimes, he could virtually miss
out foreplay altogether, and she would come. At other times, if he
tried to bypass foreplay, she would complain.
The woman lay on her side with her back to her partner, feeling
disappointed. She hadn't really expected him to want sex tonight and
now she wished he hadn't. As much as anything, she felt let down by
the way, having made the overtures, he had misjudged what she
wanted. There were times when she really wanted a penis inside her
and wasn't particularly bothered about having an orgasm. And there
were times when she really wanted both. Tonight, what she had
really wanted was an orgasm. Surely he could have sensed that? She
would have been quite happy to have intercourse as well, but what
she really wanted was climax and relief — and she had been so
nearly there. A few more seconds of foreplay and she would have
come. Why couldn't he have waited just that bit longer before
entering her? If he had just
198 199SPERM WARS THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
been considerate enough to concentrate on her until she had come,
she would have been quite happy to have him inside her. But no, all
he had wanted was to feel himself inside her, with no thought for her
at all. She knew the second he stopped stimulating her and began to
move into position that she would lose it. And by the time his penis
had started to go in, she had. That fragile focus on her own
sensations, which she needed if she was to climax, had simply
evaporated. All excitement had gone and his interminable thrusting
had killed it stone-dead.
She envied the women, and she was sure there were many, who
needed only a few thrusts of a penis inside them to send them into
multiple screaming, clawing climaxes. Sometimes she found herself
looking at women in supermarkets, wondering what their climaxes
were like. This morning there had been a short, dark-haired, wildeyed woman in front of her at the check-out. As she had waited
patiently for her own turn to pay she had had this image of the
woman, naked on a bed, hair streaming about her shoulders, having
energetic intercourse and screaming in ecstasy. For her, though, intercourse was almost always a disappointment. If she did climax during
intercourse itself, which happened once a month if she was lucky, it
was always a fairly tame affair; nowhere near as powerful as those
during foreplay or those she gave herself.
The truth was, she wasn't particularly bothered about trying to
come during intercourse. If it happened, it was a mildly pleasant
bonus, but not really worth agonising and making a big effort over.
Especially as most attempts were doomed to failure and mild
recrimination. She would much prefer her partner to give her an
orgasm when she felt like it, then satisfy himself inside her. What she
needed was a partner who was sensitive enough to her needs to be
able to judge what she wanted and when she wanted it. Should she
really have to tell him every time? The man next to her really wasn't
measuring up too well at the moment.
omen differ considerably in their response to intercourse.
Some nearly always climax during intercourse; some never
do. These differences are an important part of the overall picture of
human sexuality, and we shall explore them in Scene 36. Taking
women as a whole, it is more common to fail to climax with a penis in
the vagina than to succeed. On average, only just over 60 per cent of
routine sex episodes (from the beginning of foreplay to ejection of the
flowback) involve the woman having an orgasm. Even when they do,
she usually climaxes during foreplay (35 per cent) or post-play (15
per cent), not during intercourse itself. In fact, only 10-20 per cent of
routine sex episodes involve the average woman climaxing while the
penis is in her vagina.
There are several elements of interest in the scene we have just
witnessed. The man's confusion is one, particularly his confusion over
why an approach that stimulates his partner to orgasm on one
occasion fails miserably on the next. Another is his observation that
during his affair, his lover climaxed during intercourse much more
easily than his partner. Yet another is why the man would have
preferred his partner to climax during intercourse, not during
foreplay. But these elements are the subjects of later scenes; for the
moment, the main issue is the common lack of female climax during
intercourse. Does it reflect some sort of failure? Or is it instead a
successful part of a woman's subconscious strategy — yet another
aspect of sexuality that actually increases her reproductive success?
When foreplay first begins, a woman's body will have carried out
at least some advance preparation. The nature of this preparation has
just been discussed (Scenes 22 and 23) in connection with nocturnal
and masturbatory orgasms. Having these orgasms prepares her
cervical filter in one way; not having them prepares it another way.
Whichever option her body has taken, we know that she will settle
down to intercourse with a certain level of protection against disease,
a certain level of vaginal lubricant,
200 201
WSPERM WARS
a certain strength of cervical filter, and a certain population from
nought to millions of sperm in her oviducts, womb and cervical
crypts. If she has anticipated her situation correctly, these different
levels will mean the state of her cervical filter is as ideal as possible,
and she will get maximum benefit from the intercourse that is about
to begin. Precisely what state of cervical filter is ideal varies
according to her circumstances.
For example, the ideal filter will vary according to the stage of her
menstrual cycle (Scenes 22 and 23). It will also vary according to
whether or not she is contemplating infidelity (Scene 26). The ideal
filter is different yet again if she is about to be inseminated by a man
who is not her regular partner. In particular, it differs according to
whether she wants the inseminator to have an advantage or
disadvantage in any sperm war that might be about to take place
(Scene 26). No matter what the ideal cervical filter may be for any
given woman in any given circumstance, though, the general
principle we are about to discuss remains the same. So in order to
illustrate this principle, let's concentrate on the woman in Scene 24.
This woman had just finished menstruating. Ovulation (if it was
going to occur this cycle — Scene 15) was therefore between seven
and twenty days away, and the intercourse that had just finished
would not make her pregnant. Nevertheless, the sperm from this
intercourse could influence sperm retention at her next intercourse,
which in its turn could make her pregnant (Scene 7). As far as we
know, infidelity during her next fertile phase was unlikely — but, as
always, was not impossible. So even though this current intercourse
was during her infertile phase, it was important to her to retain an
optimum number of sperm — for all she knew these sperm might
suddenly, albeit indirectly, play a role in influencing the paternity of
her next child.
Given her situation, all the woman needed from her intercourse
was a small number of young sperm to store in her cervical crypts
(Scene 4). Having such a reservoir would give her maximum
flexibility over the next few days. When, sometime during those next
few days, her body decided what cervical
THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
filter would be ideal for her next anticipated insemination, she would
have all the raw materials necessary. (Without sperm in her cervical
crypts, her options would be much more limited (Scene 22).)
Moreover, the younger the sperm she could collect now, the longer
her flexibility of choice would last. Of course, at the same time as
collecting the sperm which would give her this flexibility, she needed
as always to minimise the risk of disease.
Before intercourse, her cervical filter was strong because of the
presence of menstrual debris (Scene 3). Most of the sperm from her
last intercourse, a week earlier, had been carried from her body by her
menstrual flow. A few infertile sperm might still have been in her
oviducts and a few of her cervical crypts might still have contained a
number of, albeit fairly geriatric, sperm. Although this set-up
constituted an adequate filter, it would benefit from some 'tidying-up'.
It is at this stage of the menstrual cycle that many women would
either masturbate or have a nocturnal orgasm (Scenes 22 and 23),
thereby helping to rid their cervical mucus of the last of the menstrual
debris, top up their vaginal lubricant, and empty their cervical crypts
of geriatric sperm. Such an orgasm would facilitate lubrication at their
next intercourse. It would also, on balance, slightly strengthen their
cervical filter — in particular, it would give them extra protection
against invasion by any disease organisms carried in the next
inseminate. But it would also minimise their retention of sperm,
particularly old, less motile ones.
The woman in Scene 24 might have been due for a nocturnal,
perhaps even later on in the night in question. If she had had one, it
would have produced the ideal cervical filter for her circumstances.
But an unexpected intercourse intervened before this could happen,
and when her partner initiated foreplay, her cervical filter was not
ideal for the inseminate she was about to receive. She could, of
course, have resisted his sexual overtures and waited until her body
had prepared her cervical filter properly. However, she did have
another option, and this was the one she pursued. Having failed to
prepare for this
202
203SPERM WARS THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
unexpected intercourse by having a nocturnal or masturbatory
orgasm, her body instead tried to engineer an orgasm during foreplay.
A 'foreplay orgasm' performs all of the functions of a nocturnal or
masturbatory orgasm, and for the woman in Scene 24 would have
been a perfectly adequate last-minute substitute. The problem she
faced in pursuing this option was that her strategy required
cooperation from her partner. In part she needed him to provide
stimulation. More importantly, she also needed him to give her time to
climax. But he did not.
We shall discuss why he did not in Scene 25. The simple answer, is
that he would benefit most from his partner climaxing during
intercourse, not during foreplay. On this occasion, male and female
interests were not mutual. This is often the case, which means that a
woman cannot always rely on a man's cooperation when her body opts
to have an orgasm during foreplay. The woman in Scene 24 nearly
managed to engineer the foreplay orgasm her body needed to create
the ideal scenario for insemination, but just failed. Having failed, her
next best response was not to climax at all. And that is what happened.
When a woman has no orgasm during intercourse, then the number
and types of sperm she retains are dictated by the cervical filter in
place before the intercourse began (as is her resistance to invasion by
disease organisms). If her body has anticipated events correctly, this
filter will be just right to retain the best number and types of sperm for
the next few days of her reproductive life. By not having an orgasm
during intercourse, therefore, a woman's body is in effect saying:
'Don't change a thing. The situation in your cervix is as good as it can
be. Just let him inseminate you and your cervical filter will do the
rest.'
In the scene, the situation in the woman's cervix was not ideal when
her partner ejaculated. When her best strategy was thwarted, her body,
by avoiding an orgasm during intercourse, did the next best thing. Her
failure to climax represented a
success. (Precisely why will be made clear in the next scene.) We are
about to watch the couple for just a little longer.
SCENE 15
Correcting Mistakes
They both found it difficult to relax. Their post-coital sleep was fitful,
and after thirty minutes or so both were wide awake again. Suddenly,
for no obvious reason, the man's penis began to stir and within
minutes it was hard against his partner's back. There was no
mistaking this feeling in his loins. He wanted sex again.
The woman had felt his penis rise and then harden, and wondered
whether he would make any overtures. She found herself hoping he
would, assuming her interest was because she had failed to climax
during their recent foreplay. To her surprise, however, she realised
that what she really felt like was having his penis inside her again. So
clear were her feelings that when her partner hesitantly put his hand
between her buttocks to stroke her genitals, she forestalled him by
turning over to face him. After they had kissed a few times, she gently
took hold of his penis and guided it into position so that he would be
in no doubt as to what she wanted him to do.
As he slipped in, she was so wet from their previous intercourse he
felt almost as if he wasn't touching the sides. When he first began his
slow thrusting, it got worse. There was hardly any sensation on his
penis except wetness. He was a long way from ejaculation.
She on the other hand, almost as soon as he entered her, felt the
first sensation that told her she might come. As he worked backwards
and forwards, backwards and forwards, she began to focus on her
genitals, and it was working. Then came the fantasy. It was the darkhaired, wild-eyed woman from the supermarket queue. She was lying
naked on top of her,
204 205SPERM WARS
black hair flying everywhere as she contorted her body, now to rub
their genitals together, now to kiss her all over. With the
combination of the sensations from her partner and her fantasy, the
woman's body wound itself up towards a climax. The noises in her
throat were becoming more urgent, more rhythmic. Just a little more
focus, just a little longer . . .
By now, the man realised his partner was heading towards an
orgasm. Her sounds were becoming more intense. He responded
with his own sounds. The overwhelming wetness of her vagina had
now gone, and he was beginning to get the sensations on his penis
that he needed. But he still wasn't certain he was going to ejaculate.
He worked on a fantasy. It wasn't his partner underneath him but the
flirtatious seventeen-year-old from work. She was staring into his
eyes and massaging her breasts with her hands. Between the guttural
and rhythmic sounds from her throat she was telling him how
wonderful he felt and how he mustn't stop. That did it, and only just
in time — his partner was climaxing. As she did so, he briefly lost his
focus, but still managed to ejaculate in the next half-minute.
For her, the climax was satisfying and just what she wanted. For
him, their combined climax had given a sense of achievement and
satisfaction. She didn't often come with him inside her and he wanted
to make the most of the occasion. But he didn't. Almost within
seconds of their expressing surprise and pleasure at the episode, they
were both asleep.
t first glance, the couple in this scene have behaved very
strangely. Why did they both feel like intercourse again so
soon? Why did the woman now feel like intercourse and not
foreplay? Why did she feel like an orgasm during intercourse now,
when only half an hour earlier she had felt no such inclination?
Could each person's behaviour really have been part of a strategy
that over enough occasions would enhance their reproductive
success? As we know, a woman does not need to climax during
206
THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
intercourse for sperm to enter her cervix. Even without a climax, the
inseminate collects at the top of her vagina to form a pool, her cervix
hangs into the pool, and sperm leave to escape into her cervical
mucus (Scene 3). Nevertheless, a climax does make a difference to
how many sperm enter her cervix. Usually, a climax during
intercourse weakens her cervical filter greatly, allowing many more
sperm to leave the seminal pool, penetrate the cervical mucus, and
hence be retained. Such a climax therefore means fewer sperm are
ejected in the flowback. A multiple orgasm (in which a woman has
two — or even more — climaxes without 'coming down' in between)
has an even greater effect on sperm retention. Essentially, this
influence of the orgasm, whether single or multiple, is achieved in
four ways.
First, when a woman climaxes during intercourse, her cervix
gapes in just the same way as it does during masturbation (Scene 22).
As we saw then, this gaping stretches the cervical mucus sideways,
widening existing mucus channels and creating new ones by splitting
the mucus, and thereby opening up many more pathways for many
more sperm. Any blocked channels in her cervix are effectively
bypassed and rendered ineffectual.
Secondly, as she climaxes during intercourse her cervix dips up
and down as well as gapes — again, just as it does during
masturbation. Now, however, it is dipping up and down in seminal
fluid, thereby mixing the pool. This mixing helps more sperm,
particularly older, less mobile ones, to contact and penetrate the
cervical mucus.
Thirdly, the climactic contraction and rippling of muscles in the
womb and vagina during orgasm generate pressure changes in the
womb and cervix. These changes effectively 'suck' the usual fingers
of semen (Scene 3) much further into the channels of cervical mucus.
This stronger upsuck of semen into channels that are already
increased in number and enlarged by the orgasm does two things. It
helps to neutralise any acidity of the lower part of the mucus glacier,
making it easier for sperm to escape the seminal pool into the cervix;
and it increases the volume
207
ASPERM WARS
of semen in contact with the mucus, again allowing many more
sperm to escape.
Fourthly, a woman's climax during intercourse voids many of
her cervical crypts of old sperm. Although these ejected sperm may
eventually block some of the newly formed channels in the same
way as they do after a masturbatory orgasm, sperm newly arrived
from the seminal pool still find that they have many more crypts all
to themselves. Effectively, therefore, an intercourse orgasm creates
more storage space for sperm to occupy.
This combined gaping, dipping and sucking of a woman's cervix
during an intercourse orgasm permits her to retain far more sperm
than if she had no orgasm during intercourse. As a rough guide, she
retains 50-90 per cent of sperm if she has a climax during
intercourse compared with 0-50 per cent if she does not. Indeed, so
effective is a climax during intercourse at helping sperm out of the
seminal pool that, no matter how strong the filter a woman prepares
in advance, such a climax negates it. In effect, then, when she feels
like climaxing during intercourse, her body is saying to her: 'We
have made a mistake in our preparation for this intercourse.
Circumstances have changed, and our cervical filter is too strong.
We need many more of the sperm that are on their way than we
shall get if we don't do something. Bypass the filter. That way we
shall let in more sperm and eject fewer in the flowback.'
Of course, for an orgasm during intercourse to have the
consequences just described, there needs to be a seminal pool in the
vagina. We should expect, therefore, that an orgasm during
intercourse will be effective at bypassing the filter only if it occurs
after the man has ejaculated. This turns out to be true, but the
situation is not quite as simple as we might expect — because a
woman's subjective climax during orgasm is not actually the critical
event as far as sperm retention is concerned.
Even if she climaxes about a minute (two minutes at the most)
before the man ejaculates, the orgasm will still permit large
numbers of sperm to bypass her cervical filter. How can this be? It
is because the moment she subjectively identifies to
THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
be her climax is only the beginning of a series of events in her
womb and cervix which she cannot feel but which may continue for
several minutes. The peak of the cervical activity that affects sperm
retention actually occurs one to two minutes after her subjective
climax. By the time her cervix reaches this peak, she is already
beginning to relax. As long as the seminal pool is in place before her
cervical activity peaks, her filter will be bypassed. In fact, as long as
it is still in place, a climax even as long as an hour after ejaculation
will allow her filter to be bypassed. There is no need for the man's
penis to be in her vagina, and it makes no difference whether it is he
who stimulates her to orgasm during this post-coital phase or
whether she stimulates herself via masturbation. So even if a woman
avoids climax while the penis is in her vagina, her body still has up
to an hour to change its mind.
We can now discuss why, in Scenes 24 to 25, as the night
progressed the woman's needs changed as far as orgasms were
concerned. The word 'episode' will be used here to mean the whole
time from the beginning of foreplay to the ejection of the flowback.
On the night in question we followed the woman and her partner
through two sexual episodes. At the beginning of the first (Scene
24), her body's main requirement from intercourse at that stage of
her menstrual cycle was to retain small numbers of sperm that were
as young as possible. She also needed to minimise the risk of
infection. To fulfil this requirement she needed to strengthen her
cervical filter before her partner had any chance to inseminate. This
would both improve her resistance to infection and make life
difficult for the older, least motile sperm in his ejaculate. The right
filter for her needs could have been produced a day or so in advance
via a nocturnal or masturbatory orgasm, but her body had failed in
this.
Even so, it was not too late. Her motivation and behaviour during
the first episode were just what they needed to be, because although
she failed to engineer an orgasm during
208 209SPERM WARS THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
foreplay, she did the next best thing and avoided climaxing during
intercourse.
At the beginning of the second sexual episode (Scene 25), the
woman's needs were still the same — small numbers of young
sperm at minimum risk of disease — but the circumstances had
changed. Most importantly, her partner was now offering to give
her a small inseminate rich in very young sperm — younger than
any in his previous inseminate. This was just what she had wanted
all along, and it was this offer that made her body interested in a
second insemination. However, the first insemination had left her
with two problems.
First, her cervical filter was now stronger than before because of
the influx of blockers from the first insemination. If she delegated
sperm retention to her now over-strong cervical filter, she would
lose more of the young sperm in the second inseminate than she
would like. Secondly, she still had the seminal pool from the first
insemination at the top of her vagina. If she had an orgasm during
foreplay now, she would bypass her filter with large numbers of
older sperm from the first inseminate — just what she had gone out
of her way to avoid during the first episode.
Her solution to these two problems was straightforward. What
she needed was to get rid of the first seminal pool, then to use an
intercourse orgasm to bypass her cervical filter. That way she
would retain a large proportion of the very young and desirable
sperm from the second seminal pool. So how could she get rid of
the old pool, given that it probably hadn't yet decoagulated enough
for her to eject it as a flowback? Her best option was to encourage
the man to remove it with his thrusting penis (as described in other
circumstances in Scene 21) before introducing his second ejaculate.
Her body generated the necessary urges. First, she no longer felt
like foreplay, but wanted a penis inside her as soon as possible.
Secondly, she felt like an orgasm during intercourse. Once
intercourse had begun, her body then timed its build-up so that she
didn't climax until the old seminal
pool had been removed and her partner was nearly ready to
ejaculate.
In this discussion we have, inevitably, considered only one
specific sequence of events — the sequence relating to the woman
in Scenes 24 and 25. And although we cannot, obviously, discuss
every combination of circumstances and responses, there are some
general principles worth noting.
First, a woman prepares for her next anticipated intercourse by
having a nocturnal or masturbatory orgasm — or by not having a
nocturnal or masturbatory orgasm — whichever is appropriate, as
explained above. Secondly, if she has anticipated correctly, she
should let the entire sexual episode proceed without orgasm and
leave her filter to do its job. On the other hand, if she has not
anticipated correctly, she should aim to correct her mistake by
having an orgasm at some time during the episode.
In the latter situation she has two options, depending on what type
of mistake she has made. The fact that orgasms during foreplay are
more frequent than orgasms during intercourse suggests that a
woman is more likely to err on the side of having too weak a filter
than too strong. This could be strategic. It is easier to encourage a
man to help her climax during foreplay (strengthening her filter)
than to help her climax during intercourse (weakening her filter).
Once she allows him to insert his penis into her vagina, she loses
much of her control over what he does and when he does it. Even
then, however, she has a fall-back strategy: orgasms after the man
has withdrawn are a substitute for intercourse orgasms, permitting
her to bypass her filter whenever she needs or wants to (again, as
just described).
The best moment for a woman to climax (or not) during a sexual
episode thus varies considerably from occasion to occasion. The
best moment for her to climax as far as the man is concerned,
though, varies much less. As we have already seen (Scenes 12 and
14), he also will have anticipated the intercourse and tailored his
ejaculate accordingly. He will have masturbated or not, as
appropriate, to suit his body's own best
210 211SPERM WARS
interests. Most often he will be best served by a woman climaxing
during intercourse, because only by this means will his carefully
prepared inseminate succeed in having as many of its sperm
retained as possible.
But there is a limit to how much time and effort it is worth him
putting into getting a woman to climax during intercourse. First, if
her body is not interested in an intercourse orgasm, he cannot force
her to climax, no matter how hard he tries. Secondly, the cervical
sperm filter which he can sometimes try so hard to bypass may on
some occasions not actually exist. If the woman has retained very
few sperm from her previous insemination, if she has neither
masturbated nor had a nocturnal since that insemination, and if any
even older sperm or menstrual debris have been cleared, the filter in
her cervix will be as weak as it can be anyway. In this case, the man
gains little if anything from making a great effort to encourage her
to climax during intercourse.
All of this leaves him with a very difficult, if not impossible,
series of decisions to make during sex. First, he has to judge
whether the woman has a filter that is worth bypassing. If not, he
has no need for her to climax during intercourse. If she has a
significant filter, his best option is for her to have an orgasm during
their sexual episode. Even an orgasm during foreplay will do, as
long as he manages to inseminate her within the minute or so
afterwards. If he opts instead to try to get her to climax during
intercourse, he may have trouble succeeding, and if so he will have
to decide how long it is worth carrying on thrusting. He could opt
instead to ejaculate first and then see if he can stimulate her to
climax afterwards, before she ejects the flowback. Or he can just
abandon all attempts to bypass her filter and hope that this is an
occasion when there is no real filter to bypass.
Looked at in this way, a sexual episode is actually a contest
between the man and the woman. Except on those rare occasions
when the same outcome, bypassing the filter, suits them both, each
is forever trying to maneuver the other into
THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
doing something that is against their body's interests. Whether the
man succeeds in what is his safest ploy — to ejaculate a few
seconds after the woman has climaxed — inevitably depends more
on the woman than on himself.
A woman may insist on a foreplay orgasm, then cooperate or
hinder as the man tries to inseminate her within a minute or so
afterwards. If she curtails foreplay, several strategies are possible
during intercourse itself. She may cooperate by waiting until he is
about to ejaculate, then climaxing with him. Or she may not
cooperate. She may climax so quickly that he is unable to ejaculate
within the critical minute that follows. Or she may avoid climaxing
and wait for him to give up and just go ahead and ejaculate — in
which case intercourse becomes a war of attrition, each waiting for
the other to climax. Once the man has ejaculated, the woman can
either avoid climaxing before ejecting the flowback, or she can
cooperate by helping him to give her a post-coital climax. Or,
almost the ultimate cooperation, she can 'finish herself off' by
masturbating to orgasm before ejecting the flowback.
It might, at first, seem strange that, given the competitive nature
of intercourse, men and women appear to make it easier for each
other to judge how near they each are to their climax. Even to the
objective observer, the sounds made by men and women during
intercourse give a clear indication of how their levels of sexual
excitement are changing (which is why the more exaggerated of
such sounds are dubbed on to pornographic films). When climax
comes, it is clear from the sounds, which would seem to indicate a
cooperation between a man and woman that might belie our
interpretation of intercourse as a contest. The sounds, however,
have become part of the contest.
Sometimes, of course, the sounds really do give an accurate
indication of what is happening. On those occasions when a
virtually simultaneous climax is in both people's interests, they are
the method used to achieve this mutual aim. But it is precisely
because the sounds are sometimes honest that on occasion both men
and women can use them to trick the partner. In surveys, over half
of women admit to faking orgasms sometimes, and a
212 213SPERM WARS THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
quarter to doing so often. That they often succeed in fooling the
partner is evident from another survey — which found that the man
invariably reports a higher frequency of simultaneous orgasms than
his partner. There are cases on record in which a man has reported
that his partner always climaxes during intercourse whereas she
herself has stated that she never does. The scene we have just
witnessed was one of those relatively infrequent occasions when
both the man and the woman had the same requirements from their
intercourse, and cooperation was in their mutual interest. In the next
scene, however, the needs of the woman we meet are very different
from those of one of the men who inseminate her. The female
orgasm is about to enter the arena of sperm warfare.
Scene 26
Putting It All Together
The woman lay back in her Friday-night bath and let the last waves
of her orgasm subside. She had finished her period only a week ago
and this was the second time since then. Both times the thought and
the action had come out of the blue. A minute earlier she had been
soaping and rinsing her breasts, with nothing more erotic on her mind
than whether she should clean the bathroom this weekend or suggest
her partner do it while she was away. Maybe it had been the touch of
her soapy hand on her nipple, but the next second the thought was in
her mind, the tingle was between her legs, and she knew she needed
relief. Now, after five minutes of successful cooperation between her
fantasies, her finger and her clitoris, her breathing was easing, her
heart was slowing down, and she was wallowing in the combined
warmth of bath water and post-climactic glow.
To masturbate twice in five days was unusual for her; once a week
or once a fortnight was more like it. She wondered if it
was because she had given up the pill recently, having convinced her
partner that she really wanted another child. However, she did not
question her body too closely — she was enjoying this atypical burst
of sexuality. She mused over the way that two nights ago, only a
couple of hours after she had masturbated, she had then more or less
insisted that her partner give her an orgasm during foreplay as well,
gently resisting his attempts to penetrate until he complied. Three
orgasms in a week. She was doing well.
Over the following weekend, she had routine sex with her partner
only once, on Saturday, and again he obliged her with an orgasm
during foreplay. Early Sunday morning, just before she woke, she
had a nocturnal, her fifth orgasm that week. However, it was the last
exciting thing to happen that day. The remainder was spent
travelling, on the long drive to and from her parents, who had
volunteered to look after her two daughters while she was away. By
the time she and her partner had returned home and she had packed,
it was late. He still wanted to have sex. 'One for the road', as he put
it. But she was tired and managed to put him off. On Monday, she
left for the airport and her long-awaited three-day conference trip
abroad. Her companions were to be her boss and two other
colleagues, one of whom was her new lover.
Actually, 'lover' was an exaggeration, or at least premature. They
had known each other for nearly a year, ever since she had joined the
company. It was her first job since the birth of her younger daughter.
Slowly, they had grown close. Neither had ever found it easy to
make friends with their own sex, but in each other they had found
the nearest they were likely to get to a 'best friend'. In their early
thirties, both had young children and both were now in long-standing
but increasingly stale relationships. He was even convinced that his
partner was having an affair. Within a few months of meeting, they
had freely acknowledged their physical attraction to each other. He
had tried somewhat half-heartedly to do something about it, but
214 215SPERM WARS
each time he suggested a plan, she had found some excuse. It hadn't
been difficult.
They had also acknowledged that they could never live together.
They were both opinionated and competitive, with strong likes and
dislikes. Their relationship worked only as long as they talked about
their separate problems, their separate aims, and their separate
wishes. Whenever they talked about principles, attitudes or just life in
general, they would argue. She could not imagine a home without at
least three cats; he hated cats. She was pale and prone to sunburn; he
was swarthy and worshipped the sun, often spending hours naked in
his secluded garden. She was aggressively vegetarian; he could not
imagine life without meat. She was obsessively tidy; he still had the
air of an adolescent, putting his feet on tables and dropping his
crushed beer cans on the floor. She was provocative and mischievous,
a tease; he was gullible, but strong-willed, ambitious and obstinate.
They each found the other's traits to be irritating but attractive, each
seeing in the other characteristics which moderated their own
polarity.
Their relationship had changed six weeks ago. On that day, in a
field in searing sun, she had given him oral sex and promised that one
day she would have his baby. True, she had done so in part as a ploy
to avoid having sex with him there and then, but she had meant it.
She just hadn't expected the opportunity to arise quite so soon. Then,
as early as two weeks after her promise, they had been asked by their
boss to accompany him on a business trip abroad. Her future lover
had then made her promise that if they had the chance, they would
have sex while they were away.
Even so, she still didn't give in easily. He visited her hotel room
almost as soon as they arrived early on the Monday afternoon, but
she sidestepped his advances, pointing out that this was their only
chance to see the city during the day. Together, they mingled with
summer tourists in the streets and on the canals and enjoyed each
other's company, watching the world parade past as they sat and
sipped at pavement bars. By
THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
late afternoon, they felt extremely close as they arrived back at the
hotel. But still she resisted sex, saying she only just had time to get
ready before they met up with their boss for the evening.
The meal and the socialising were a strain because they had to
maintain a facade of distance. They had both agreed that nobody must
suspect they were so close. It was midnight when they arrived back at
the hotel. She pointed out that the next day would be very busy. She
tried to persuade him that they needed a good night's sleep and that
maybe they should wait until tomorrow night. But this time, he would
not be deterred.
She had seen him naked before, but it was the first time he had seen
or really touched any of the more exciting parts of her body. By the
time they were both naked, because still she teased and delayed, he
was on the verge of ejaculation. With scarcely any foreplay, he tried
to enter her. She objected strongly to his urgency, but he was now so
desperate that he virtually forced himself inside her. He ejaculated
immediately, with scarcely a thrust.
Once he had withdrawn, she chastised him. He apologised and said
that next time he would be more considerate. She said there wouldn't
be a next time if he behaved like that. But she didn't throw him out of
her bed and within fifteen minutes he had stroked, kissed, licked and
massaged her into a climax. Within the hour, his penis was back
inside her for the second time that night, and after a long and sensuous
intercourse they climaxed more or less together.
Half-way through the night, as a sperm war was being fought inside
her body, she told him to go back to his room. When he protested, she
said she was worried about them being discovered together in the
morning. Over the next two days, they maintained a professional
distance, both during the day and while socialising in the evenings.
But on both nights they spent a few hours in bed together before she
made him return to his room. By the time they left to fly home they
had had
216 217SPERM WARS
intercourse six times, and on three of those occasions she had
climaxed while he was inside her. Her body was full of her lover's
sperm, from cervix to oviduct — and she was only forty-eight hours
from ovulation.
She arrived home late that Thursday night, feeling very tired, very
guilty and a little nervous. She bathed, avoided her partner's advances
by pleading tiredness and nausea, and slept. Sometime during the
night, she had a nocturnal.
At work, on Friday, she tried to avoid her lover as much as
possible. He sought her out at every opportunity and tested her
ingenuity to its limit. Eventually, when he tried to snatch a kiss, she
rounded on him. Their trip had been fantastic, she told him, but now
they were back things had to return to normal. She didn't want to hurt
her partner and she didn't want to risk discovery. They had had a
good time and it seemed they had got away with it. She wanted it to
stay that way. If he wanted to remain close to her, he had to forget
sex. A friend she needed, a lover she didn't. She felt guilty at the look
of hurt on his face as she spoke, but her tirade worked. After that, he
made no further sexual advances.
That evening, the last she and her partner were to have on their
own before collecting their daughters, she bathed, masturbated, and
then appeared naked in their lounge urging her partner to give her
another baby. They had intercourse on the floor, just the once, and
she pretended to climax with him. That pleased him because these
days she rarely climaxed with him inside her. They then sat and
relaxed in the warmth of the summer's evening, a cat on each lap. As
she gave him the public version of her business trip, sperm warfare
resumed inside her body and continued all night. But this war was
very one-sided.
As they drove to her parents' the next day, a sperm entered the egg
which had just arrived in one of her oviducts. She had conceived, and
with her help her lover's sperm had won both battles, and the war.
She had kept her promise to him.
THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
his, of course, is the third time we have met this woman and
her lover. We watched them in a hay-field on a sunny
afternoon as she gave him oral sex and promised one day to have his
baby (Scene 20). We also followed them that same evening as they
returned home to their respective partners and had oral sex (Scene
10). Now, we have just watched the woman's body manipulate sperm
warfare in a way that made sure she kept her promise. Her third child
would inherit her lover's looks, drive and ability in combination with
her own cunning and intelligence. Her body had decided that as the
genetic father of her third child, her lover was the best compromise
around (Scene 18).
In Scenes 22 to 25 we have unravelled, step by step, the function
of the female orgasm. We have seen the effects of having a
masturbatory or nocturnal orgasm in the days before intercourse, and
of not having one; of climaxing, and of not climaxing, while a
seminal pool is at the top of the vagina. In this most recent scene we
witnessed a woman's body putting all of these orgasms together and
biasing sperm warfare in her own best interests. As a result, she
conceived a child who was fathered by her lover, not her partner.
This move will have enhanced her reproductive success — as long as
her body was correct in judging that a child by her lover would be
more successful reproductively than a further child by her partner.
Having reached its decision over the best father for its next child,
her body set about engineering paternity. It did so by generating and
orchestrating a sequence of urges to climax and not to climax. Her
body dictated the sequence and timing of these urges according to
who was the next most likely inseminator. We can now discuss the
details of this and other such sequences. Of all of the weapons used
by a woman in her pursuit of reproductive success, her orgasm
sequence may well be the most important, particularly when she
promotes sperm warfare.
218 219
TSPERM WARS
This is the second scene in which a woman has increased her
masturbation rate in the context of infidelity. In Scene 6, the woman
masturbated more often than usual in the week before infidelity with
her ex-boyfriend. At first glance, such events seem simply to reflect
an increase in sexual excitement
— the anticipation of sex with someone other than a partner.
Closer inspection, however, shows that this is too simple an
explanation. The women in the two scenes masturbated or had
nocturnals only at times when, although infidelity was on the
horizon, the person most likely to inseminate them next was
their partner. On no occasion in these two scenes did they have
these orgasms when their very next intercourse was likely to be
with their lover. In this, women differ from men (Scene 13).
Of course, women do have nocturnal and masturbatory orgasms
just before having sex with a lover, but these are often 'mistakes'. In
Scene 26, the woman had a nocturnal on the Saturday night, yet as it
turned out her next insemination was by her lover on Monday night.
At the time she had her nocturnal, though the next most likely
intercourse was the 'one for the road' suggested by her partner on
Sunday night. As it happened, this insemination never materialised.
Her nocturnal was a 'mistake', but one she could later correct, as we
shall see.
So what is this link between infidelity and the frequency of
nocturnal and masturbatory orgasms if it is not simply sexual
excitement? And why, if they are a response to the anticipation of
infidelity, are these orgasms more likely to occur just before sex with
the partner rather than just before sex with the lover?
It is because whenever a woman anticipates sperm warfare, she
more often than not has some preference over who should win.
Usually, that preference is for the lover, not the partner — otherwise,
she would not risk all the potential costs of
infidelity (Scenes 8 to 11). In this scene, just as in Scene
6, we have watched a woman who, in anticipation of sperm
warfare, subconsciously prepared the battlefield to favour her
lover's army.
In the current scene, the woman's body had decided that the
THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
lover would be a better genetic father to her child than her current
partner, but a worse long-term partner. Her body's ploy, therefore,
was to collect sperm for fertilisation from the lover, but not to do
anything else that might cause her to lose her current partner. This
meant she would have to have sex with her partner both before and
after her infidelity. Otherwise, his suspicions would be aroused.
Consequently, she could not avoid sperm warfare. In any case, her
body would not want to miss out on the benefits of promoting such
warfare (Scenes 17 and 21). Her best option, therefore, was to make
life as easy as possible for her lover's army while still giving it a
contest to win. As events turned out, her body engineered the
situation perfectly.
The woman's body initiated its strategy a week before the anticipated
infidelity. Its aim was to allow routine sex with her partner to
continue undisturbed, while ensuring that his army would be as small
as possible when the troops were eventually called to battle. Her
body's technique was first to make her feel like masturbating a day or
so before each anticipated routine intercourse, and this strengthened
her cervical filter. Then, during each routine sexual episode, it made
her feel like an orgasm during foreplay. This orgasm strengthened
her filter still further. In the event, the woman and her partner had
two episodes of routine sex during the critical week before her
infidelity. On neither occasion did she feel like an orgasm during
intercourse itself. So the result of her body's preparations was that on
neither occasion did she retain many of her partner's sperm. Her
nocturnal on the Saturday night was a continuation of her body's
strategy. There was a strong possibility that her partner would want
sex on the Sunday night, just before she left on her trip. The
nocturnal prepared a strong filter, ensuring that even if he had
insisted, she would still have managed to keep down the number of
his sperm in her tract — especially if she also had yet another
foreplay orgasm during the episode. As it was, she managed to avoid
insemination by her partner on the Sunday night altogether.
When the woman was eventually inseminated by her lover
220 221SPERM WARS
on the Monday night, she contained only a small army of her
partner's sperm, just as her body had planned. However, she still had
a reasonably powerful cervical filter, not least because of the
unnecessary nocturnal on the Saturday night. She tried to delay the
first intercourse with her lover for another day to give her partner's
army time to decrease in size still further, but her lover would not be
delayed any longer.
Because of the strength of her filter, when she did have sex with
her lover for the first time, her body felt like an orgasm during
intercourse. That way, she could correct the 'mistake' of her earlier
nocturnal preparation and bypass her filter. Her lover, though, was
pursuing a strategy of his own. Having been thwarted in his attempts
to have sex with her on so many previous occasions, his absolute
priority was to ejaculate inside her. When at last she allowed
penetration, he ejaculated as quickly as he possibly could, before she
changed her mind yet again and made him withdraw.
His urgency prevented her body from bypassing her strong filter
during intercourse, and at first few of his sperm managed to escape
from the seminal pool into the cervix. But, with his cooperation, she
climaxed from his caresses fifteen minutes later. With the seminal
pool still in position, his huge army now bypassed her filter and
flooded her cervix and womb. The lover had got the best of both
worlds — rapid insemination before she changed her mind, and a
high level of sperm retention. And she had satisfied her body's urge
to collect as many sperm from this man as possible. As long as his
army was reasonably competent, he should now easily defeat the
remnants of her partner's small and ageing army.
An hour later, when the woman's lover offered to top her up with
a small army of young sperm — his second inseminate — she
accepted and they cooperated to produce an intercourse orgasm.
This bypassed the filter in her cervix — although that filter was now
substantial, containing blockers from both men — with the result
that a high proportion of the lover's young small army reached her
cervix and womb. The combination of
THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
his first relatively huge army and his second small, young army had
an easy victory while she later slept.
Over the next two days, he kept her topped up with young sperm
— and on half of the occasions she bypassed her filter with an
intercourse orgasm. On her return home, she contained a large and
powerful army from her lover. Her body's aim was now to engineer a
strengthening of her filter before allowing her partner to inseminate
her. She succeeded. First, she avoided sex with him any sooner than
she had to without arousing his suspicions. Secondly, she had a
nocturnal. Thirdly, unable to rely on his cooperation over a foreplay
orgasm after such an absence, she took the safer option the next
evening and masturbated — then immediately solicited sex.
This was to be the insemination that deceived her partner into
thinking he could be the father of any child conceived that month.
She felt no urge to climax during intercourse, only an urge to pretend
that she did. As a result, few of her partner's sperm made it through
her cervix into the battlefield. And those that did would be outcompeted by the numerical superiority of her lover's killers and egggetters. There was never any doubt that this particular war would be
won by the woman's lover.
Her strategy worked very successfully, but of course none of it
was achieved at a conscious level. Her body achieved its aims by
subconsciously orchestrating the sequence of moods, motivations
and responses that would best serve her reproductive interests.
Consciously, she will simply have relished her sexual pleasures, her
excitements and her fears as she cleverly negotiated the slalom of
infidelity and deception.
The behaviour and responses of this woman during her infidelity
were fairly typical. In Britain, the average frequency of nocturnal and
masturbatory orgasms for women during phases of fidelity is just
under one per week (Scenes 22 and 23). During phases of infidelity,
the rate increases to about every other day. These orgasms occur
most often when women anticipate that their next intercourse will be
with their partner. When they anticipate it will be with their lover,
they occur less often.
222 223SPERM WARS THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
Women also change their likelihood of having an intercourse
orgasm during infidelity. On average, they are more likely to climax
during or after intercourse with a lover (33 per cent of occasions)
than they are during or after routine intercourse with their partner (22
per cent of occasions). Thus a lover's army receives assistance in
entering the battlefield more often than does a partner's.
These differences mean that on the whole not only does a partner
encounter a stronger filter than a lover, he is also less likely to
receive help in bypassing that filter. On average, the advantage
enjoyed by a lover in sperm warfare is relatively large. When a
woman is not being unfaithful, she helps her partner to place a large
sperm army inside her on 55 per cent of occasions. When she is being
unfaithful, she helps him on only 38 per cent of occasions, but helps
her lover on 65 per cent of occasions — nearly twice as often.
The really impressive part of a woman's strategy, however, is the
way she manages to engineer a strong bias over sperm retention in
favour of her lover without betraying any hint of infidelity to her
partner. First, she keeps the frequency with which she climaxes
during or after intercourse with her partner the same (22 per cent of
intercourses), whether she is being unfaithful or not. Secondly, her
main weapon against her partner is to increase her frequency of
masturbation and nocturnals, but because these orgasms are secret,
the change passes undetected by him. Thirdly, her main weapon to
favour her lover is to have fewer nocturnal and masturbatory orgasms
before, and more bypass orgasms during, sex with her lover than with
her partner. Yet again, her favouritism cannot be detected by her
partner.
We can now see why it is as important for a woman to hide her
masturbations and nocturnals from her partner as it is for a man
(Scenes 12 to 14). If a man knew exactly when and how often his
partner masturbated or had nocturnals during their routine sexual
activity, any change in pattern could alert him to the fact that her
body might be anticipating infidelity. With this warning, he could
then be more vigilant, guard her
more intently, and generally make it more difficult for her to collect
anybody else's sperm. Her strategy for influencing the outcome of
sperm warfare, therefore, just like a man's, depends on being able to
change her masturbation and nocturnal patterns without being
detected. Female masturbation and nocturnals have therefore been
shaped to be secretive just as rigorously as male masturbation and
wet dreams. And again, just as for men, it is the involvement of
masturbation and nocturnals in infidelity and sperm warfare that has
generated in women the subconscious urge for secrecy and privacy.
The fact that, by and large, people do not know each other's
masturbation patterns is a testament to the success of that urge. For
all the same reasons that we discussed for men (Scenes 12 to 14), the
urge for privacy and secrecy over masturbation shown by most
women is often matched by their curiosity, suspicion, distaste, and
even prejudice regarding the practice in general.
Of course, women do not always climax in secret. Just like a man,
a woman will sometimes do so in full view of her partner without
them then carrying on to have intercourse (Scene 20). Sometimes she
does so by an open display of masturbation, but most often she does
so with his help. We have already discussed facets of this situation
with respect to oral sex (Scene 10), but often a man stimulates the
woman with only his fingers. Here it is the orgasm itself that is
strategically important to both the man and the woman — not any
information the woman wishes to give or the man wishes to collect
by his smelling and licking of her genitals.
Such open orgasms, without intercourse immediately following,
have exactly the same consequences for sperm retention as a
woman's private masturbation and nocturnals. Studies show that all
three have an equally strengthening effect on her cervical filter,
particularly if at orgasm she still has a large population of sperm in
her cervical crypts. The result is that all three reduce sperm retention
at her next insemination, even if this does not happen until days
later.
For the man, there is an element of reassurance in seeing
224 225SPERM WARS THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
or helping his partner have such an orgasm. His subconscious mind
registers that, if she does have sex with another man over the next
day or so (for example, through infidelity or rape), at least she starts
that intercourse with a strong filter, and any army placed in her tract
will be reduced. Of course, the man's ploy is not infallible, and his
partner can render his preparation ineffectual by having a bypass
orgasm with the other man. Moreover, if, as is most likely, her next
intercourse is with her partner, his preparation will have been
counter-productive — he will have strengthened her filter against
himself.
As we have noted, helping a woman to climax during foreplay is,
on the whole, disadvantageous to the man. Unlike the climaxes
between sexual episodes that we have just discussed it is always
him, never another male, who is going to suffer lower sperm
retention. The other disadvantage here is that the longer he waits to
penetrate the greater the chance he will lose the opportunity —
either the couple could be disturbed, or she might change her mind
about allowing intercourse.
It is probably for these reasons that, as in many scenes in this
book, most men would prefer to enter a woman and begin
intercourse without trying to help her climax during foreplay. But
because women often have much to gain from a foreplay orgasm
(Scenes 24 to 25) and frequently seek a man's cooperation in
achieving one, the level and length of stimulation during foreplay is
one of the major areas of conflict between men and women during
their sexual encounters.
A man is most prepared to cooperate over foreplay orgasms when
he has least to lose, that is, when the woman either has no sperm in
her cervical crypts or when the inseminate he is about to produce has
little chance of becoming involved in sperm warfare; and when he
has least choice, that is, when the woman refuses to allow
penetration until she has had an orgasm during foreplay. So it is not
surprising that men are most likely to cooperate over a foreplay
orgasm when they have spent most time with their partner (so
infidelity is unlikely), and when the woman is most insistent. Even
having helped the woman
to climax during foreplay, however, a man often shows great
urgency in his attempts to penetrate and inseminate — because if he
succeeds within one to two minutes of the woman's climax he can
still bypass her cervical filter (Scene 25).
As we have seen time and time again, most of the strategies
shown by men and women in relation to ejaculation and orgasm are
subconscious — orchestrated by the body via sequences of mood,
libido and sensitivity to stimulation. Indeed, most of the behaviour
described in this book is similarly subconscious, the product of
genetic programming rather than cerebral rationalisation. But the
conscious element features none the less, as men and women learn
by trial and error how best to satisfy their feelings. Men have to
learn many things, from the basics of penetration to the subtleties of
the female orgasm. Women have to learn how to climax, how to
encourage men to help them to do so — and when and how to fake
it. Both sexes also have to learn the strategic subtleties of infidelity
and the prevention of infidelity; and how to select a mate, how to
court and seduce the selected mate, as well as how to avoid
unwanted attention.
The ability to learn all of these things both well and quickly,
making as few mistakes en route as possible, will have a big
influence on a person's reproductive success. Scenes 27 to 29 are
concerned with how men and women learn these necessary sexual
subtleties.
226 227LEARNING THE GROPES
CHAPTER NINE
Learning the
Gropes
SCENE 27
Practice Makes Quite Good
As the young man rolled off the girl beneath him on the bed, a pile
of coats and sweaters collapsed on top of him in the dark. He pushed
them away, on to the floor. He had done it. At long last, he had done
it. Without a shadow of a doubt, he had finally ejaculated inside a
woman.
He had come close twice before. The first time, when he was
sixteen, was during a heavy petting session with a girl two years
younger than himself. On that occasion, he had been content just to
ejaculate, and hadn't really tried to enter her. Then, last year, at a
party just like this one, he had tried again but failed. Convinced that
he was inside the girl, he had happily thrust away until he ejaculated.
It wasn't until afterwards that she had told him that all he had done
was thrust down between her buttocks and ejaculate on to the bed, or
maybe somebody's coat. This time, however, he had definitely
succeeded. Nineteen years old, and he had lost his virginity.
Admittedly it had been quick; at the most a few seconds, once he
was inside her. Admittedly, also, he had needed help. As on the
previous occasion, the prods of his penis had failed to find the girl's
vagina — though he wouldn't have known. Once again,
he had thought he was inside her and had begun thrusting. But when
she had taken hold of his penis and guided him in, the sensation was
so different that he realised he must have been somewhere else —
again, probably between her buttocks. He had nearly ejaculated
prematurely, but had hung on just long enough to push himself right
in. As he lay in the dark by her side, his sense of achievement and
satisfaction knew no bounds. He told her how fantastic it had been and
asked how it had been for her.
She said, 'Great' with a sarcasm that would have deflated anybody
but a first-timer. When she had first seen him at the party, she had
dismissed him as a prospect, thinking how young and inexperienced
he seemed. But when he homed in on her, she had changed her
mind. He was quite good-looking and his clothes were expensive.
His conversation had been a little immature and naive, but his witty
stories of achievement and failure had impressed her. When he had
brazenly asked her if she felt like having sex with him, she had been
just drunk and randy enough to think it might be a good idea. As
soon as they were in the dark room, he had more or less ripped off
her underwear. Then, he had missed out all foreplay, lain on her like
a dead weight, and prodded between her buttocks and the bed. Even
when she helped him inside her, he had ejaculated as soon as he was
in. Now he wanted praise. She felt embarrassed, annoyed and
sexually frustrated; she vowed that, next time, she would take more
notice of her first impressions.
Someone knocked on the bedroom door and, getting no response,
tried to push it open. When the bolt on the inside held, the
prospective intruder urged whoever was inside to hurry up,
reminding them that they weren't the only ones who needed the
room. When the girl began to shuffle around on the bed, the young
man asked her what she was doing, saying they needn't give up the
room just yet. It was so dark that neither could really see the other.
The girl said she was looking for her knickers, and could he
remember what he had done with them? He had put them on the
floor somewhere, he said, and would look for them in a minute;
there was no rush he repeated. Embarrassed
228 229SPERM WARS
that she had really allowed such a nonentity to have sex with her and
eager to put the experience out of her mind, the girl lied that she
needed to go to the toilet, and would he please help her to look?
Reluctantly, he pulled his pants and trousers up from around his
knees, fastened his zip, and got off the bed to help her.
In truth, he couldn't remember what he had done with her
knickers. He had been astounded that this girl, whoever she was, had
agreed to come into the bedroom in the first place. He had only
talked and danced with her for about an hour. Even once he had got
her into the bedroom, he was so certain that she would change her
mind any second that he had taken off her tights and knickers with the
speed of light, while she was still compliant. In his hurry, he could
have thrown her underwear anywhere.
He asked what colour her knickers were. When she said they were
black, it seemed clear that there was no chance of finding them
amongst all the coats and sweaters littering the room. He suggested
they switch on the light, but she told him to forget it, she would go
without. The next second she was at the door, fumbling with the bolt.
As the young man stumbled over the clothes towards her, the door
opened and she was gone. No sooner had she left than the next
couple were on their way in and he had to push past them. By the
time he was out of the door, the girl had escaped down the stairs and
immersed herself into a conversation.
Partly at first to avoid any further attention from the youth she had
just escaped, she attached herself to the oldest man at the party. He
was nearly thirty, ten years older than her. She knew who he was and
knew also his reputation as a womaniser. Good-looking and
reasonably successful, he told her he had managed to come to the
party only because his partner had gone to visit her mother for the
weekend. She stayed with him for the rest of the evening and became
totally captivated by his charm and gentleness, by his humour and
sensuality. When he suggested, as people began to leave, that she
should let him drive her home, she accepted. When she suggested, as
they
LEARNING THE GROPES
kissed in his car and his hand discovered she wasn't wearing any
underwear, that he should let her share his bed for the night, he
accepted. She spent the rest of the night, all the next morning and
part of the afternoon being kissed and stroked, pampered and
stimulated. Three times he brought her to orgasm and four times he
inseminated her. In between their love-makings she slept and
dreamed of a long relationship with him.
For a while after that weekend, she managed to live out her
dream. She remained the man's lover until she discovered that, as
well as his partner, he was having sex with at least one other girl
besides herself. Then she stopped meeting him.
At about the same time, her flatmate started seeing the young man
to whom she had lost her knickers on the night of the party. After the
pair had been an item for a few weeks, the girl's curiosity got the
better of her and she asked her flat mate what he was like in bed.
She could believe her friend when she said that at first he had known
nothing. Evidently, however, he was learning fast, and a few days
earlier he had actually found her clitoris. All he had to do now was
learn what to do with it — then, she thought, he might become quite
good. She had high hopes.
exual technique does not come instinctively to a man. It has to
be learned. In this respect he is no different from all male birds
and mammals. Arousal, erection and ejaculation are preprogrammed and automatic, but the niceties of sex have to be
acquired. If a male is ever to persuade a female to allow
insemination, he has to pick up the subtleties of courtship and
stimulation. He then has to learn how to copulate quickly and
efficiently so as not to miss the opportunities his courtship technique
has provided.
Male birds, for example, first have to learn how to stand on a
female's back, then how to bend their tails to press against her
genitalia before transferring sperm. Male mammals have to learn
what to do with their erections — where to put their
230 231
SSPERM WARS
LEARNING THE GROPES
penises. Even as intelligent an animal as an adult male chimpanzee
is totally inept if denied sexual opportunity during adolescence. His
sexual development depends first on watching others having sex,
and secondly on practising intercourse himself. In the company of a
female, an inexperienced adult male such as this becomes aroused
and erect but has no idea what else to do. He even has trouble
knowing which end of the female to approach with his penis, and
rarely succeeds in copulating on his first encounter or even on the
next few. Thus, if any male mammal is not to miss the first of his
lifetime opportunities to inseminate a female, he needs to practise
during adolescence — and human males are no exception. As the
youth in the scene discovered to his cost, failure to learn sexual
technique quickly during adolescence can soon result in missed
opportunities for insemination. And it can have an important
influence on a man's level of reproductive success. In all human
cultures, young males first hear and see the basics of sexual
technique from those with experience, either precocious peers or
older educators. In many cultures, sexual experimentation by
young, even pre-pubertal, boys and girls is openly encouraged or at
least condoned. A boy who learns early how to persuade a girl to
have sex with him, how to prepare her genitalia for penetration,
how to stimulate her to lubricate, and how to find and enter her
vagina with his erect penis will be less likely to miss his first
opportunities to reproduce. The youth in Scene 27 had his first
chance to learn sexual technique at sixteen years of age. This single
occasion was not enough. Two years later he missed his first
opportunity to inseminate a girl because he had not yet learned
either how to find her vagina with his penis or what it felt like once
he was inside. At nineteen, albeit with help, he managed to find a
girl's vagina and inseminate her, but even then his inexperience cost
him a full relationship with his conquest and, therefore, any further
sexual opportunities with her.
Of course, a man has to learn much more than simply how to
gain a woman's sexual interest, how to retain that interest
long enough to get the opportunity for intercourse, and where to put
his penis when the moment finally arrives. A man who can also learn
how to influence a woman's orgasm pattern has much more chance
of influencing her pattern of sperm retention (Scenes 24 to 26). But a
woman's body does little to make it easy for males to learn the
necessary techniques. In fact, it does the converse. Why? The answer
lies in mate selection, and the way in which women collect
information about men.
We have already discussed at some length the criteria by which a
woman selects a man (or men) to be her short- or long-term partner
(Scenes 18 to 21). There we considered the importance of a man's
status, behaviour, looks, fertility and sexual health. We also
discussed how most mate selection is a process of compromise; how
a man who can seem the best bet at one stage in a relationship may
not seem so later; and how a woman sometimes needs to balance a
man's visible qualities, such as his status and looks, against his less
visible qualities, such as his prowess in sperm warfare.
In order to collect information about a man, a woman in effect
needs to set him a series of tests. Depending on how many tests he
passes compared with other available candidates, she will then either
accept or reject him. She needs to set tests that are challenging but
not impossible. They are of no value to her if they are too easy, or if
they are so difficult that no man can pass them. A woman's body and
behaviour have been shaped to present such a test. And as often as
not the male quality being tested is his ability to learn how to use her
body and cope with her behaviour.
Learning is always more difficult when a given behaviour does
not always elicit the same response. The female response to any
particular male stimulus is notoriously unpredictable. This is true
from the earliest moments of courtship to the occurrence of orgasm
during intercourse. Not only do women differ (for good reason —
Scene 36), but individuals differ from occasion to occasion (again for
good reason — Scenes 24 and 25).
This variability allows the female to set challenging, but
233
232SPERM WARS
passable, tests for those males who satisfy their other mate-selection
criteria. Inevitably, these tests are most difficult for inexperienced
males. As an example, let us consider the position of the clitoris. As
we have already noted in humans, apes and many monkeys this
organ is small, difficult to find, and removed from direct stimulation
by the penis during intercourse (Scene 22). It can be stimulated by
some part of the male's anatomy during intercourse — usually the
penis — but unless the male knows exactly what to do it does not
have to be.
More than anything, stimulation of the clitoris during intercourse
depends on the stance or movement of the female, and so is much
more under female control than male. This is as true for humans as
for any other mammal, and it is not surprising in view of our
conclusions concerning the function of intercourse orgasm (Scene
25). This fact makes life extremely difficult for an inexperienced
male, as he struggles to learn the techniques of intercourse. If his own
behaviour sometimes does and sometimes does not stimulate the
woman, a man can only learn how to exploit this most powerful
source of sexual stimulation either from a great deal of trial and error
or from direct education by a woman. Even then a clitoral technique
that works with one woman does not necessarily work with another
(Scene 36).
On the night of Scene 27, the girl was looking for a long-term
partner (Scene 18), and as part of her selection procedure her body
was eager to test her chosen male's competence at intercourse.
Because he had at least learned something of courtship, the young
man passed her early tests and had a chance of passing her
intercourse test. He failed dismally. The more experienced man,
however, passed her tests at all levels. The girl probably preferred the
older man for many reasons, but one was undoubtedly his superior
sexual technique.
When asked why they like men who can stimulate them to
orgasm, women naturally reply in terms of the pleasure they gain
from orgasm. But the advantages a woman gains from selecting the
more competent men are biological as well as sensual. This
LEARNING THE GROPES
is despite the apparent disadvantage that, the more influence a man
has over her orgasm pattern, the less control she herself has. Yet we
have argued (Scenes 22 to 26) that a woman's control in this respect
is a major weapon in influencing her reproductive success. Is it
possible that this loss of control is more apparent than real ?
No man can force a woman to climax if her body does not want to.
A competent man simply helps her to climax when she does want an
orgasm. A less competent man forces her to do much more for herself
via masturbation and nocturnals. An experienced and competent man
is therefore a help, not a threat. But there is another aspect to the
female preference for more experienced males.
Basically, a woman uses a man's approach to foreplay and
intercourse to gain information about him. A man who is able to
arouse a woman and stimulate her to orgasm signals that he does
have past experience of other females. This tells her that other
women have also found him attractive enough to allow intercourse.
The more effectively he stimulates her the more experienced he
should be — and hence the greater the number of women who have
so far found him to be attractive. Mixing her genes with his,
therefore, may produce sons or grandsons who are also attractive to
women, hence increasing her reproductive success.
Interestingly, the females of some species of birds are also known
to use this yardstick during mate selection. If a female sees one or
more other females mating with a particular male, she also is more
likely to mate with him. So being seen to be attractive to other
females is an attractive male trait in its own right
Despite the difficulties, virtually all men eventually learn the
basics of intercourse, and most learn even the subtleties. But the
faster they are able to learn, the fewer opportunities for insemination
they will miss in their lifetime, and the more children they are likely
to father, with more women, than their slower-learning
contemporaries. Studies have shown that
234 235SPERM WARS
boys and girls who experiment most before puberty, particularly if
that experimentation involves genital contact, have more sexual
partners in their lifetime. Making the most of early opportunities for
sexual practice gives a young boy the edge over his contemporaries,
and ensures that in generations to come he will have more
descendants in the population.
Obviously, failure to practise when younger does not totally
condemn a young man to a life without successful intercourse. If a
girl or woman finds a man sufficiently desirable as a short- or longterm partner in other respects, she may tolerate inexperience, a lack
of consideration, and other sexual shortcomings. Mate selection is,
after all, a process of compromise (Scene 18). In Scene 27, the
flatmate undertook to educate the young man in the niceties of
intercourse. Her aim was to create a partner who, in addition to
qualities that she obviously quite liked, would be moderately
competent at helping her to climax when it suited her. While
educating him, she was also testing his ability to learn sexual
techniques. He was becoming 'quite good', suggesting that any sons
and grandsons he might give her would also be at least 'quite good'.
Importantly, in educating him to help her to climax, she was not
educating him to help other women to climax — or, at least, not to
the same extent (Scene 36). He would learn something from her, but
not as much as it might seem.
In this discussion, we have concentrated on the sexual
development of young males as they struggle to pass the tests created
by women in the name of mate selection. Although young women
have far less to learn about the basics of intercourse than young men,
they do need to learn how to recognise and act upon the urges
generated by their bodies. For example, a girl has much to learn
about how to masturbate and when to do so — or not. She also has to
learn how and when to seek a man's cooperation in stimulating
orgasm during foreplay, intercourse and post-play. Finally, she has a
great deal to learn about the techniques of deception and reassurance
within relationships.
236
LEARNING THE GROPES
Her urges to do all of these things will be orchestrated
subconsciously by her body, but the expertise she develops in
satisfying these urges will depend on her ability to learn — and to
learn quickly. Failure to learn sexual technique quickly is unlikely to
make a woman miss opportunities for insemination as clearly as
inexperience may do for a man. Nevertheless, it will influence the
extent to which she makes the most of the opportunities that present
themselves. Not least, the efficiency with which she learns will
influence her ability to make the most of sperm warfare.
We discuss this learning process for women in Scene 31. First, we
look at the dangers and repercussions of the way in which women test
male sexual prowess in the early stages of courtship.
SCENE 18
Rough and Tumble
The four teenagers walked noisily through the summer wood,
sheltered at last from the scorching early afternoon sun by the heavily
leafed trees. Ahead of them, squirrels skittered off the path and birds
flew into the bushes, sounding their alarm calls. Nobody had trodden
this path for a while.
One of the two boys had recently passed his driving test and had
borrowed his mother's car for the day. They had parked by the side of
the road, and for the past fifteen minutes had been walking through
the wood on their way to a place known to one of the girls. At first,
they had made their way along the narrow path in pairs, the darkhaired couple at the front, the second boy and his girlfriend behind.
Each couple walked hand in hand. But when the path widened out,
they broke up. The boys had taken off their shirts and, on some
pretext, had started to flail each other with them. Then they had run
off, chasing
237SPERM WARS
each other among the trees. The two girls linked arms and, bending
towards each other as they went, whispered comments about the
boys' bodies and behaviour, laughing loudly each time one of them
said something particularly wicked.
Leaving the two boys to their games, the girls continued round a
bend in the path. Ahead of them in a small, sunlit clearing, a narrow,
grass-covered wooden bridge carried the path across a river. Had the
girls known what was to happen over the next few hours, they might
have thought that the dark pine plantation into which the river flowed
looked menacing. As it was, they found the place cool and beautiful.
The river was shallow, and the pebbles on its bed made the water
babble soothingly as it flowed along.
This sound of running water was the perfect antidote to the heat of
the day. Even better, just before the river bent under the bridge and
into the plantation, the water formed a large shallow pool just over a
metre deep.
As the girls approached the pool, they were overtaken by their two
companions, now breathless from their exertions. The dark-haired
one stopped at the edge, quickly stripped to his swimming shorts and
jumped in, immediately at ease in the cold water. The girls were
much slower stripping down to their bikinis and he grew impatient,
splashing and throwing water in their direction, provoking shrieks of
'No', 'Stop it!' and 'Don't do that!' There was much running
backwards and forwards as, each time they approached, he splashed
them. Profanities flew amidst the shrieks of shock and laughter. In
the end, the two girls jumped in and began to exact wet and cold
revenge on their antagonist.
The second boy watched from the river bank and slowly stripped
down to his shorts. He had been dreading this moment. He couldn't
swim and in truth had a phobia about water. He would have been
able to cope on his own, but with all the horseplay going on he was
secretly terrified. There was no way he could go into the water with
the others. He sat and watched their fun and waited nervously for the
inevitable.
LEARNING THE GROPES
He secretly envied the dark-haired boy; envied his muscular bulk,
his athleticism — and his ability to swim. He was like a magnet to
girls. At parties they would cluster around him, hanging on his every
word, laughing loudly at his jokes, each trying to make him notice
her. According to rumour he had had sex with almost every attractive
girl in their circle, even with the second boy's own current girlfriend.
He, on the other hand, was still a virgin. He hadn't even been able to
persuade his girlfriend, no stranger to sex, to let him enter her. She
didn't mind his fingers inside her and she happily played with him until
he ejaculated, but not once in three months had she let him have
intercourse.
One of the few from their group who had not so far had sex with
the dark-haired boy was the dark-haired girl who was with him today.
She was in many ways the most attractive girl in their year at school.
Until today, though, she had tended to distance herself socially, and
was usually to be seen being driven around by older men. None of
these escorts had ever lasted long, and rumour had it that she was still
a virgin and something of a tease. She had always refused to go out
with anyone her own age, even the dark-haired boy. Today, however,
his persistence had been rewarded when at last she had accepted his
invitation. As the second boy watched her white bikini go virtually
transparent as it became wet, he had to accept that really she was
much more attractive than his own girlfriend. As he watched the two
girls playing with and making up to the lad in the water, he grew
more and more jealous.
The other three knew that he couldn't swim, but underestimated his
fear of water. They urged him to join them, pointing out that it wasn't
really very deep. As he continued to decline, they grew irritated and
impatient. Even his girlfriend, embarrassed by how badly he was
measuring up to the other boy, became annoyed. Although she
genuinely enjoyed her boyfriend's company, she was much more
attracted to the dark-haired one. A few months ago she had had sex
with him, but he had dropped her almost immediately. For a while
she
238 239SPERM WARS LEARNING THE GROPES
had been inconsolable, and she still hadn't really given up hope that
one day she would get him back. At this moment she was much more
concerned about flirting with him than with her boyfriend. When the
other two decided it was time to force her boyfriend into the water,
she actually joined them. They scrambled out, grabbed hold of his
feet and hands and, despite his obvious fear and genuine pleadings,
threw him into the pool. Trying hard not to show his panic, he
quickly climbed back out of the water, swore at his companions, then
settled back on the river bank.
Eventually, his girlfriend came and sat with him and soon
everybody was out, warming up in the sun. After a short, quiet spell
he started to throw grass stalks at the other boy. There was another
chase, and an uneven wrestling match which he easily lost. When
they returned, it was the girls' turn to throw vegetation at the darkhaired boy. He threatened recrimination, went down to the river,
cupped his hands to get a handful of water, and threw it at the two
girls amidst shrieks of laughter. They retaliated by joining forces and
pushing him into the water. Then they jumped in after him and the
fray continued.
The other boy sat, watched and envied. Amidst all the splashing
and shouting, he heard his girlfriend say she was going to pull down
the dark-haired boy's shorts. Soon both of the girls were wrestling
with him. As soon as he realised what was happening, he grabbed his
shorts, shouting, 'No . . . stop it!' and swearing loudly. The other boy
watched, a jealous half-smile on his face, wishing something like this
would happen to him once in a while.
The dark-haired boy was excited. The idea of losing his shorts to
the two girls appealed to him, but he still fought and protested. He
yelled, 'No!' a few more times, swore, insisted his shorts would tear,
and then when he felt he had protested long enough stopped
struggling and let them have their way. It was the other boy's
girlfriend who completed the job, waving her trophy excitedly in the
air. When he grabbed at his shorts, she threw them to the other girl.
The dark-haired boy and the other
one's girlfriend collapsed in a heap into the water. Meanwhile, the
dark-haired girl climbed out of the pool, picked up her boyfriend's
other clothes, and disappeared with them into the woods. The naked
boy was so busy playfully wrestling with the other boy's girlfriend
and getting aroused that he didn't notice what was happening on the
bank — until his own girlfriend reappeared. When he realised what
had happened he sank back into the water to hide his erection, while
he worked out what to do next.
After listening to the jokes and the accusations of cowardice for
not standing up, he turned to his girlfriend, urging her to get his
clothes for him. However, despite good-humoured banter and
threats, she refused to cooperate. False irritation crept into his voice
and, eventually, he announced that he didn't care who saw him 'with
a hard-on' and that his girlfriend was going to pay. With that, he
swam towards the bank and clambered out of the water. His
girlfriend stood for a second, frozen with excitement and indecision.
Then, as he stood facing her on the bank, she began to run up the
path towards the bridge. The boy gave chase. The pair were only just
in view of the others when he caught her, wrestled her to the ground
and sat astride her, pinning her arms to the ground. They were both
breathless. She was laughing, but he was not. Still visibly excited, he
was on the verge of losing control.
He asked where she had hidden his clothes. She said he had to
find them. He put his hand on her bikini top and said that if she
didn't show him where they were, he would take it off. She
pretended to give in, saying she would show him where they were,
but as soon as he let her stand up she went to run off again,
laughing. He grabbed her, put one hand on the back of her neck,
twisted an arm behind her back, and asked her again to show him.
She protested that he was hurting her. He wouldn't let go until she
showed him his clothes, he said, and began to frog-march her into
the wood, heading back to the place where he thought she had taken
them. They disappeared into the trees.
240 241SPERM WARS
The other boy's girlfriend had become aroused by her close contact
with the dark-haired boy, memories returning of the occasion they
had had sex. Disappointed at his departure, she redirected her arousal
towards her boyfriend. She reached out her hand to pull him to his
feet, and suggested that they too went for a walk. Once he was
standing up, he pulled her cold, wet body against him and kissed her.
When she felt him becoming aroused, she suggested again that they
move on in case the others came back. They walked a short way until
they found a secluded spot on the river bank and lay down hidden
from the path by vegetation. When he complained that their wet
clothes were uncomfortable and that they should take them off, she
agreed. For the first time since they had met they could actually see
each other's nakedness, instead of fumbling with each other in the
dark of his mother's car. He knew she was on the pill, and assumed
that at last they were going to go the whole way. She assumed that, as
he had always restrained himself in the past, he would do so again.
At first, their petting followed its usual course. He kissed and
stroked her rapidly warming skin. She stroked his back. He fiddled
inexpertly with her genitals, she held his penis in her hand. He said
he didn't want to come yet, and moved to get on top of her. When she
complained, he said he just wanted to rub himself against her. She
said she didn't want him to. He urged her to let him, and eventually
she relented. After a few seconds on top, he said he wanted to enter
her. She said no. He pleaded, she refused. He asked why she had let
his dark-haired friend have sex with her but wouldn't let him. She
hadn't wanted to have sex with the other boy, she lied. Anyway —
and she said this with more honesty — he hadn't given her much
choice.
It was the last straw. Lying naked in the sun, on top of a naked
girl, his penis no more than a thrust away from her vagina, he was
more aroused than he had ever thought possible. All afternoon, he
had felt inadequate and suspected, correctly, that his girlfriend still
preferred his friend to him. Now he learned
LEARNING THE GROPES
what her preference was despite the fact that he had actually (forced
her to have sex. The cocktail of emotions was tipping him over the
edge. He wanted sex with her, and he was going to have it. If his
friend could force her, so could he. If she could still like his friend
despite his forcing her, she would still like him. He moved his body
down just the distance necessary to push himself in — and missed.
As soon as the girl realised what he was trying to do, she told him
to stop and began to struggle. Briefly he pleaded with her to let him
in, but when she still said no he used his weight and Strength to pin
her to the ground. They struggled as he tried both to hold her down
and to find her vagina. He stabbed and slabbed with his penis, but
kept missing. Slowly it dawned on the girl that, unlike his friend, he
didn't know what he was doing. He had the strength, and the weight,
but not the experience. He was trying everywhere but the right place.
She carried on biting and scratching and angrily protesting, while
subtly changing her position to try to make penetration easier for him.
But it was too late. The feelings of frustration and inadequacy
merged into panic in the young boy's body. He still wasn't inside her,
and he couldn't hold off ejaculation any longer. As the spurts came,
the semen running down between her buttocks on to the grass, he felt
totally pathetic. He had risked all, and failed.
For a few brief moments, the girl went quiet. Then her emotions
took over. The mixture of fear and sexual excitement she had
experienced as they struggled, the lack of release through either
penetration or orgasm, and the disdain for him that had been growing
throughout the afternoon — all erupted in anger. At every step
during the last few hours he had dwindled in stature in comparison
with his friend. She called him a bastard, told him he was pathetic,
taunted him that he couldn't even manage to rape her, and said she
was going to report him.
As she pulled on her bikini and moved to stand up, he shrank still
further in her eyes. Post-climactic release had removed all trace of
aggression and pride, and there were tears in his eyes.
242 243SPERM WARS LEARNING THE GROPES
He apologised, said it wouldn't happen again, and begged her not to
tell anybody. As an afterthought he said he wasn't really trying to
enter her, that of course he would have succeeded if he had really
meant to, and that it was just a game. He must think she was stupid if
he thought she or anybody else would believe that, she told him — he
was going to get what he deserved. With that, she threw his wet
shorts at him, told him to cover his pathetic prick, and stalked off
saying she was going to find the others and tell them what had
happened.
Even if she had found them, the others wouldn't have been
interested as they had just acted out a drama of their own. The naked
dark-haired boy, penis still erect, had frog-marched the girl through
the pine trees to the place where she said she had hidden his clothes.
She had taken him into the darkness of the plantation. There was a
soft bed of sweet-smelling pine needles beneath their feet, and they
were hidden from the sky and the path by a regiment of ten-year-old
trees. Both were high on the emotions of the past few minutes. The
wrestling in the water as they had struggled with his shorts; the
chasing, the arm-twisting, their state of undress — had all combined
to produce in each of them a high of sexual excitement. There was no
question in the boy's mind but that when she had shown him where
his clothes were, they were going to have sex. For him, there could be
no other outcome. Sexual excitement always aroused in him
aggression and an urge to dominate, even hurt. This happened every
time he had sex, even without the rough-and-tumble foreplay and
teasing he had experienced today. He wanted sex with this girl, but he
also had a strong urge to humiliate her in the same way as she had
tried to humiliate him.
The girl continued to feed off his frustration, aggression and
visible excitement. The rumours about her were true. She was still a
virgin. Fingers, but not penises, had been in her vagina. In truth, she
had a fear of real penetration, a fear that her vagina would split —
the thought had kept her awake many nights. Yet, at the same time,
she had a high level of sexual motivation. She masturbated often and
enjoyed close contact with the male
body. More than anything, she relished her mounting tension as she
waited for the moment to deny penetration to a male who had
aroused himself with her body. She knew this boy's reputation for
roughness and aggression during sex. He had, after all, had sex with
nearly all of her friends over the past Bar. Nevertheless, she was
convinced she could handle him.
When she pretended just one time too many that she couldn't
remember where she had put his clothes, and then laughed at him,
she gave him the excuse he was looking for. Again he twisted her
arm behind her back until it hurt, pulled her against him, and asked
where his clothes were. Still thinking he was joking, she repeated
that she couldn't remember and complained that he was hurting. The
next second she was on the ground, face down on the soft bed of pine
needles, and he was taking off her bikini, almost standing her on her
head in his urgency to pull off her bottom half. For a few moments
she was shocked, but still thought it was play. But when he sat
astride her buttocks, put both arms up her back so it hurt, and pressed
her face into the pine needles so that she could hardly breathe, her
excitement rapidly began to fade. He was going too far and hurting
her too much.
He told her that if he got his clothes now, she might just get her
clothes back before the afternoon was over. He grabbed hold of her
hair, raised her head off the ground, and asked again. She said OK,
but to stop hurting her. When he released an arm, she indicated a
fallen branch ahead, about waist high. He dragged her to her feet,
once more pulling both of her arms behind her and pinning them
painfully against her back. Then he marched her over to the fallen
branch, pushed her stomach against it, forced her to bend forward,
and asked where. She cried that he was hurting her, pleaded with him
to stop, and told him exactly where the clothes were. He saw them,
and then told her he would teach her not to mess him about again.
She was hurting where the branch was grazing her stomach and
from the way he was pushing her arms up her back with his left hand,
but still she didn't realise what he was about to do. So
244 245SPERM WARS LEARNING THE GROPES
far, everything had been physical, not sexual, and although she was
in pain and surprised at how powerless she was to resist his strength,
she was still exhilarated rather than afraid. It wasn't until he began to
push her legs apart with his feet that fear suddenly gripped her
stomach. Almost before she could find the words to ask him what he
was doing, he was inside her. She told him she wasn't on the pill and
begged him to stop. When she tried to cry out, the sound stuck in her
throat. The force with which he was pressing her down over the
branch and the pain from her arms, stomach and virginal vagina took
her breath away. Each thrust was agony. She began to cry, and again
and again begged him to stop. He didn't, but at least he ejaculated
quickly.
With ejaculation, his aggression faded. He told her how good it
had been and that she was the best yet. He said he was sorry if he had
hurt her, lifted her gently off the branch, and tried to pull her towards
him to hug her. She resisted. He was a bastard, she sobbed, and he
had hurt her. He stroked her head, kissed her tears, and told her that
he really hadn't meant to hurt her; that he thought she had wanted it
to be like that. For a while, they sat with their backs against a tree,
him with his arm round her shoulders. She stopped crying, went very
quiet, and began sucking her thumb. She was in pain, both mentally
and physically, and at a complete loss as to what to do. Three
thoughts kept going through her head: she had been raped; she was
no longer a virgin; and her vagina could take a penis after all, even if
it hurt.
He spoke intermittently, saying at least three times how good it
had been and how much he liked her. Just once, she accused him of
raping her. He laughed and said that he supposed it was a bit like a
rape. She said it wasn't a bit like rape, it was rape. A little later, she
said he should have used a condom. He apologised, said he had
brought some and that they were in the pocket of the trousers she had
hidden. Then he said she shouldn't have got him so excited, and in
the next breath tried to reassure her over pregnancy and AIDS.
Eventually, they
got dressed and made their way back to the river to join their
friends.
During the walk back to the car and on the drive home, the two
girls and the boy who was driving were very quiet and withdrawn.
Only the dark-haired boy chattered as if nothing had happened. Later
that evening, with the boys gone, the two girls Confided in each
other. The driver's girlfriend triggered their conversation by saying
that she had been raped. She claimed it was the second time and told
her friend about her previous experience with the dark-haired boy.
Her friend then described her afternoon.
They compared notes on what the dark-haired boy had done to
them. Then they told each other the rumours they had heard about
his treatment of some of their friends. They mused over why he
forced girls when most of them, given time, would happily have sex
with him anyway. Not very seriously, they considered reporting him
to the police, to stop him raping others. Perhaps they should both go
and report both of the boys for the afternoon's incidents. They talked
through the possible scenario at the police station, but decided that
the experience might be worse than the actual rape. Besides which, it
would mean their parents would find out and they would probably
never be allowed out again.
The driver's girlfriend had no more to do with him, and within
days began going out with another boy who had his own car.
Whenever she met him, she snubbed him or called him a rapist. She
never missed an opportunity to tell her friends how pathetic he was
and how she couldn't understand why she had gone out with him in
the first place. Once away at college, he rarely came home, anxious
to avoid the people who thought so little of him.
The day after the other girl lost her virginity, she went on the pill
and, after turning the dark-haired boy down twice, eventually agreed
to go out with him again. They carried on seeing each other for the
rest of the summer, the longest he had ever stayed with anybody. She
gained the appropriate kudos and
246 247SPERM WARS
aroused the jealousy of her friends for having landed the boy they all
wanted. Despite occasional infidelities while at college, they
continued to see each other on and off for the next three years.
Eventually they began to live together.
Their first intercourse in the pine wood set the style for their
sexual relationship. In the years that followed, they re-enacted that
and similar scenes with mutual consent. For them, intercourse was
almost always aggressive and often painful. They enjoyed devising
outrageous scenarios to generate fear and humiliation as a prelude to
it.
Four years after beginning to live together, they had their first
child.
ough-and-tumble sex play is a common element in the
courtship of humans and of many other animals, as they make
decisions about whether to have intercourse or not. Such behaviour
has many facets, most of which are illustrated in the scene — and all
of them involve an interplay between mate selection by females and
the display of quality by males. The females set tests of physical
strength and sexual competence (Scene 27), which the males then
either pass or fail. In their pursuit of reproductive success, the
judicious use of rough and tumble can have important benefits for a
woman — and a satisfactory performance can be equally beneficial
to a man.
On the vast majority of occasions, such rough-and-tumble games
unfold without any harm being suffered by either the woman or the
man. In fact, they both gain. The woman gets the information she
wants and the man, if he behaves satisfactorily, may be allowed to
have intercourse. Occasionally, however, such games can be
dangerous. It is a short step from rough-and-tumble intercourse,
across the boundary of mutual consent, to rape. This is date rape —
when intercourse is forced by a man on a woman who has at least
found him attractive enough to 'date', and often attractive enough to
kiss and 'pet'. It is not the random, predatory rape by
LEARNING THE GROPES
a man who is usually a complete stranger to his victim (Stone 33).
In principle, it should be easy to draw an unambiguous line
between rough-and-tumble intercourse and date rape. If a woman
says no, but the man forces intercourse anyway, then the intercourse
was a rape. However, as all legal systems round the world
acknowledge, the situation is not that simple. One of the problems is
that, in many aspects of life, people often say no when what they
really mean is 'See if you can persuade me.'
In Scene 28, we saw five incidents in which people said no. On
two of these occasions they appeared to mean it, and on three they
didn't. First, the girls told the dark-haired boy not to splash them, but
they didn't mean it and within a few minutes were enjoying their
retaliation. Secondly, the other boy had a genuine fear of the water,
said no when invited to join the Others, and pleaded not to be thrown
in. The other three underestimated his fear, ignored his pleas, and
threw him in. Thirdly, the dark-haired boy at first did not want to lose
his shorts, said no, and fought to keep them. He soon changed his
mind and decided that he would like to lose them. Nevertheless, he
continued to say no and to struggle. Fourthly, the other boy's
girlfriend resisted her boyfriend's attempts at intercourse. She \aid no
and struggled. But when she realised he wasn't capable of forcing
intercourse she changed her mind at the very last minute and tried to
help him penetrate. Yet she continued to struggle and say no. Finally,
the dark-haired girl had a genuine fear of penetration. Although she
had enjoyed the rough and tumble, she said no at the first indication
that the boy intended to force intercourse, and struggled and pleaded
thereafter as best she could. Underestimating her fear and not
believing that she really meant no, he ignored her pleas and
inseminated her.
At first sight, the second and fifth of these events fit into one
category, and the remainder into another. Unfortunately, the situation
is not that simple. As far as date rape is concerned, there is a further
complication — the reaction of girls who have been date-raped in the
weeks that follow their experience.
248 249
RSPERM WARS LEARNING THE GROPES
In a study of American students published in 1982, it was found
that girls who were exposed to an attempt at date rape were three
times more likely to resume their relationship with the man
concerned if his attempt succeeded than if it failed. Presumably, the
fact that all of these women had claimed the man had attempted rape
means that at the time they said no and meant no. Yet, if the man
succeeded in forcing intercourse, nearly half (40 per cent) later
resumed their relationship with him, just like the dark-haired girl in
the scene. If he failed, then nearly nine out of every ten of the women
(87 per cent) refused to have any more to do with him, just like the
girlfriend of the less popular boy in the scene.
This reaction of women makes it even more difficult to draw the
line between date rape and rough-and-tumble intercourse. In the
discussion that follows, we shall make no further attempt to
distinguish between the two — that is a job for the legal profession,
not a biologist. The phenomenon under discussion is rough-andtumble intercourse, and the arguments that follow are concerned with
the influence this behaviour may have on male and female
reproductive success.
In Scene 27, we discussed how much men and women have to
learn in order to get the most out of their earliest sexual
opportunities. We also discussed the link between learning and mate
selection, particularly the way that a female needs to set tests of
competence for males as part of her process of selecting.
This testing is an important process — a woman uses it to identify
which men will give her sexually competent sons and grand-sons.
But when such testing involves rough-and-tumble sex play, as in
Scene 28, it can become a dangerous business. Nevertheless, even in
the scene, both girls survived relatively unscathed and both came to a
decision about their respective partners. To judge from each girl's
subsequent behaviour, one of the boys passed that afternoon's tests,
the other failed. So what were these tests, and what insight do they
give us into the function of rough-and-tumble sex play in humans
and other animals?
Before we can answer this question, we have to be clear over
precisely how a man and woman's interests differ when they begin
such behaviour. Many of the important factors are touched on
elsewhere in this book, but in the discussion that follows they
become crucial — and this is because here we are primarily
concerned, as in the scene, with a couple's first Intercourse.
Once a man and woman have established a long-term
relationship, the costs and benefits that they each experience from
intercourse become similar (Scene 16), even though the (unction
may differ (Scene 2). But with first-time intercourse the situation is
very different. Apart from the chance of contracting disease, which
is a risk they share, their potential costs and benefits are not at all
the same — especially if there is a strong possibility that their first
intercourse together may also be their last. A man, like all male
animals, has much less to lose and much more to gain from a oneoff intercourse than a woman.
From the viewpoint of reproductive success, and disregarding
here any social pressures to which the man may be exposed, the
siring of a child with a woman other than a long-term partner need
not be expensive for him (Scene 13). Having Inseminated her, he
can if he chooses attempt to avoid all further contact with both her
and the resulting offspring. A single intercourse need have no
greater cost than that involved in fending off future claims for help
and support if she does have a child. Against what could be,
therefore, a relatively minor cost he can set the chance of producing
a child. If he does not take each opportunity to inseminate a new
woman as it arises, he may never get another chance. In which case,
whoever fathers her next child, it will not be him. A man's
reproductive success depends to a significant extent on his ability to
make the most Of one-off opportunities.
The situation is very different for a woman. For her, conception
is a major event. It may commit her at least to months of pregnancy
and usually to years of dedicated effort. The man
250 251SPERM WARS
concerned might desert her (Scenes 8 to 11, and 16). Moreover,
conceiving via a man later proved to be genetically inferior could
result in her raising a less successful child than if she had waited for
a more suitable man (Scene 18). Together, these two dangers mean
that an incautious, one-off intercourse can considerably reduce a
woman's reproductive success. Her priorities need to be when
(Scene 16) and with whom (Scene 18) she has one-off sex, rather
than how often. Caution and selectivity are of maximum
importance.
Of course, women are not always cautious. The primary situation
in which a woman might abandon caution, though not usually
selectivity, is when she has a one-off opportunity to collect sperm
from a particularly desirable man. Usually, this is a man who she has
already judged from a distance would make a good genetic father for
her next child (Scene 18). In this book, we have seen several women
behaving in this way (Scenes 6, 17, 19, 21 and 26). Most often, as in
those scenes, such behaviour is within the context of infidelity. Once
a woman has a long-term partner, the costs of one-off intercourse are
reduced as long as her infidelity remains undetected (Scenes 9 to
11). Her long-term relationship provides a springboard from which
to exploit the genetic benefits of one-off sex with selected men
without risking too much. She does not have this freedom, however,
if she does not have a partner.
The result of these pressures is that women, like all female birds
and mammals, are genetically programmed to be cautious and
selective. In past generations, women who were not so were less
successful reproductively than those who were. All women alive
today are the genetic descendants of the more cautious of female
ancestors, not their more reckless contemporaries. Men, on the other
hand, are genetically programmed to be urgent and single-minded
about one-off sex. In past generations, men who were not urgent and
persuasive were less successful reproductively than those who were.
All men alive today are the genetic descendants of the more urgent
of male ancestors, not their more complacent contemporaries.
252
LEARNING THE GROPES
We can see, then, that there is a big difference between men and
women in the potential costs and benefits of a one-off intercourse.
This difference automatically means that the two sexes approach any
potentially sexual situation with a conflict of interests.
A man can only satisfy his urgency if he can convince the
woman concerned that she actually wants to be inseminated by him,
now, rather than by him or somebody else, later. His
only alternative is to try to force insemination whether she wants it
or not. At first glance, it might seem that both of the boys in Scene
28 simply opted for the second course of action. Again, the situation
is not that simple. The complicating factor is that male persistence
in the face of female resistance can be a normal, mutually
acceptable facet of courtship and foreplay. So, too, can aggression
and a level of physical trauma. We are back to the way that women
set men tests as an aid to mate selection — which brings us to the
function of rough-and-tumble sex play.
This is an emotive issue — so emotive that it is probably best
broached by first considering the courtship of animals Other than
humans. For example, if we watch the courtship of dogs, we often
see a clumsy male persisting and persisting with his advances
despite rejection after rejection by the female. II we watch domestic
cats we see females clawing, scratching and spitting at prospective
suitors. If we watch mink, we see a male drawing blood as he tries
to subdue the female's spirited resistance.
Witnessing such behaviour, it is difficult not to feel sorry for the
females. At best they are being pestered, and at worst they are being
physically damaged by males who refuse to take no for an answer.
Yet, despite their resistance, female cats and dogs do eventually
allow one of their persistent and aggressive suitors to mate. As for
female mink, if they do not experience physical trauma at the male's
hands, they do not ovulate. Their bodies are on hold, waiting for the
right male to inseminate them before they produce an egg (Scene
15). In all of these
253SPERM WARS
animals, female resistance is actually a test of male competence.
Rough-and-tumble sex play in humans is similar.
On average, men who are physically able to overcome the final
defences of a female and achieve insemination leave more offspring
than those who are not. So women whose sons and grandsons also
have this ability will enjoy greater reproductive success. One of the
criteria (Scene 18) that a woman can add to her list when selecting a
mate, therefore, is his ability to overcome her physical resistance —
but how does she test such an ability?
Initially, she can simply watch him in competition with other
males. The young men in Scene 28 spent much of their time chasing
and wrestling with each other, doing their best to display their
strengths and hide their weaknesses. But finally, the only real test a
woman can set is whether a man can negotiate and overcome her
own defences. To test this, she has to resist first verbally, then
physically. The stronger and more realistic her resistance, the better
the test.
This is, of course, a dangerous game. Resist too little, and the test
is meaningless. Resist too much, and the male may inadvertently
cause real rather than superficial damage. The fact that courtship
rough-and-tumble aggression rarely results in serious damage in
cats, mink or even humans shows the accuracy with which this
feature of sexual behaviour has been moulded by natural selection.
Even in mink, the level of trauma that stimulates a female to ovulate
is set at a level just high enough to test the male's ability to
overcome her defences, but not high enough for her to suffer longterm damage.
In species such as humans which form long-term relationships,
rough-and-tumble sexual behaviour is most important during the
early stages of courtship. Once a woman has tested a man's ability to
force himself on her, she need not do it often thereafter. But as in all
such tests of male health and ability (Scene 20), even within a
relationship a woman gains from occasional reappraisal of her
partner.
Of course, in this as in most features of human sexuality,
LEARNING THE GROPES
people vary (Scenes 35 to 36). For some, rough-and-tumble sex play
is indeed a minor and infrequent element in their relationship. For
others it is an essential element even up to the level of
sadomasochism, if they are to accept the other person as a suitable
partner. The dark-haired couple in our scene clearly leaned in this
direction. Their intercourse on that first afternoon was rough, painful
and humiliating for the girl, yet through the experience she
recognised the boy as a compatible partner. In the years that
followed, their sex life was to continue in the same vein — even
once he was her long-term partner, she tested his ability to force her
on many occasions during routine sex.
We can now understand the decisions made by the two girls in the
scene in the days and weeks that followed the writs by the river. The
boy who forced the dark-haired girl Into intercourse passed her tests.
She was already attracted to him, as were most other women, and her
body perceived that his qualities made him seem a good candidate
for giving her reproductively successful sons and grandsons. These
qualities included physical power and sexual competence, qualities
that her own characteristics made her well suited to test.
In contrast, the other boy lost stature in his girlfriend's eyes at all
levels as the afternoon wore on. In part, he suffered by comparison.
Mainly, however, he failed in an absolute sense DO live up to his
girlfriend's criteria for acceptability. There wore probably two ways
he could have passed her tests, but he failed in both. The basic cause
of his double failure was inexperience. First, with more experience,
he would probably have opted for restraint and might eventually
have gained long-term benefits (as, for example, did the experienced
man in Scene 20 who, when faced with a similar situation, opted for
patience rather than force and six weeks later reaped the reproductive
benefits (Scene 26)). Instead, however, he opted for force. Even then,
with greater experience at intercourse he might still have cemented a
longer-term relationship and hence won many future opportunities
for insemination.
254 255SPERM WARS LEARNING THE GROPES
SCENE 29
How to Con
Outside the car, it was very dark and very cold. Inside, it was warm
and getting warmer. After pulling off the road among the trees, he
had left the engine running and the heater on while they climbed into
the back seat. Now everything was warming up nicely. The girl's
breasts were exposed, her knickers were around her knees and his
hand was between her legs in the warmest place in the car. She was
struggling with the front of his trousers, and he was very excited. As
he kissed and nibbled the side of her neck, his ear rubbed against the
car window, cold and wet with condensation.
Since acquiring his own car, six months ago, this was the third
time he had been in this position. But on the first two occasions,
each with a different girl, he had missed his chance.
The first time, he had naively assumed that any girl interested in
sex would be on the pill. She wasn't — and she wouldn't let him
have sex without a condom, which he didn't have anyway. He had
pleaded with her to let him in, promising he would withdraw before
he came. She said she had been promised that once before, would
never trust a boy again, then immediately lost interest and asked him
to drive her home.
The second time, he had simply been taken by surprise. Offering a
lift to a girl he scarcely knew, he had been amazed to find that before
they were even half-way home he was being seduced into finding a
quiet spot for them to enjoy themselves. They had been on the verge
of intercourse when she suddenly stopped and asked him to use a
condom. When he said he
didn't have one, she pushed him away. He offered to drive off and
buy some, but she too had lost interest and had wanted to go home.
With both girls, he had only the one opportunity for intercourse.
Neither had given him a second chance. He had vowed never to miss
another opportunity, and ever since his second experience had
carried a condom with him. Now, two months on, with the foil
around the condom looking faded and worn, here at last was his
chance to reap the benefits of his hard-earned lesson. If he failed this
time, it wouldn't be because he wasn't prepared — or so he thought.
The moment came, and without even being asked he fumbled for
the condom in his pocket. As he tore off the foil, the girl took off her
knickers and got herself into as comfortable a position as she could.
He pulled the condom out of the foil, perched it on the tip of his
penis, and tried to roll it on. But it wouldn't go. The condom just
wouldn't roll. He held it up in the blackness to try to work out which
way round it should go, but could see nothing. He turned it over and
tried again. He began to panic as he felt movement deep in his penis.
The girl asked if he was having trouble. It was fine now, he lied,
and with the unrolled condom still balanced precariously on the tip
of his penis he moved into position and entered her without help.
He knew the condom had come off as soon as he started thrusting,
but he had been waiting for this moment too long to 'lop now. With
supreme will-power he fought off the ejaculation that was so near as
he entered and revelled in the excitement of an unprotected
intercourse. Not until he went to withdraw, several minutes after
ejaculation, did he tell the girl the bad news, feigning surprise as he
pretended to search for the condom end with his fingers. The girl
swore and, in panic, tried to find the condom inside her. In the end,
with longer fingers and a better angle, it was he who found and
removed the still unrolled rubber. He apologised
256 257SPERM WARS LEARNING THE GROPES
profusely, admitted the possibility that he might not have put it on
properly, but suggested that perhaps they had just been too vigorous
in their love-making and she had pulled it off him.
As he drove her home, he tried to argue that there wasn't really any
danger. The condom would still have stopped him from shooting the
sperm into her womb and it did have a chemical on it that killed
sperm. Even if a condom came off, he argued, it still worked like a
cap. Being relatively naive herself, the girl believed him. In the days
that followed, he bought a supply of condoms and practised. At great
financial expense, he practised until he could don a condom in any
light, in any position, and with either hand.
He never accidentally lost a condom during intercourse again, but
did so deliberately on five further occasions, each time with a
different girl and each time after they had once previously had
intercourse with the condom properly in place. Each time, frustrated
by the reduced sensations of wearing the rubber, he rolled the
condom down such a short way that it came off almost immediately
he began to thrust.
None of these deliberate deceptions produced a baby. Four of the
girls did not ovulate after their 'accident'. The fifth did ovulate and
her egg was fertilised. However, the 'accident' with the condom and
the prospect of pregnancy and motherhood just before the most
important exams of her life stressed her so much that, when the
fertilised egg reached her womb, it passed straight through without
implantation. When her period began, she went out to celebrate.
Nevertheless, the young man's misuse of condoms did make him a
father, but through accident, not design. The mother of his child was
the girl with whom he had accidentally first discovered the condom's
potential for gaining unprotected intercourse. Naively reassured by
his story of the condom working like a cap, she had patiently waited
for seven weeks for a period that never came.
258
n Scenes 27 and 28 we have explored the way that young men
and women have to learn various techniques in order to make the
most of their sexual opportunities. In the modern world, they also
have to learn how to use contraception. The young man in the
current scene missed two opportunities for intercourse through his
general lack of experience with girls. He nearly missed a third
through his lack of experience with condoms.
When we discussed family planning in Scenes 16 and 17, we
concluded that modern contraceptives may have little impact on the
total number of children a woman has in her lifetime. Nevertheless,
they do supplement her natural methods of family planning, thereby
giving her even more control over when and with whom she
conceives. For a woman today, modern contraceptives are an
important aid in her pursuit of reproductive success. Not least, they
are a useful weapon in her manipulation of sperm warfare. In this
section, we discuss the ways in which a man may also use modern
methods of contraception to enhance his reproductive success.
The idea of hindering or killing sperm as they leave the penis is
not new. Over two thousand years ago, Pliny suggested rubbing
sticky cedar gum over the penis before intercourse. The sheath has
been known since Roman times and was in use in many parts of
Europe by 1700. Fallopio designed the first medicated linen sheath in
the 1500s, but the item took its name from the personal physician to
King Charles II, the Earl of Condom, who recommended its use to
the king as an aid to prevent the contraction of syphilis. By the
1890s, all of the barrier methods of contraception in use today were
openly on sale in the United Kingdom. However, their use is unlikely
to have been widespread until well into the twentieth century. In the
1980s, about 50 per cent of couples in countries such as
259
ISPERM WARS
Britain were relying on the man for their contraception. Only 30 per
cent were using condoms; the remaining 20 per cent were simply
using withdrawal.
The perhaps surprisingly high incidence of withdrawal as a means
of contraception during routine sex is in part a reflection of how men
feel about using condoms. As most women can testify, if a man is
expected to wear a condom during intercourse, he becomes much
more cavalier in his attitude towards contraception. Of course, when
asked why they don't like using condoms, men say that they simply
don't enjoy sex so much with them on — the 'Wellington boot'
syndrome. Women, on the other hand, tend to be much more
favourably disposed towards them. This difference between the sexes
in attitude towards condoms reflects a very important consequence of
their use — by preventing sperm from entering the vagina, condoms
negate a man's reproductive benefit from intercourse much more than
they negate a woman's.
This difference is less marked during routine sex than during
casual sex. When a man and a woman are in a long-term relationship,
the timing, spacing and number of children that are best for one
partner are usually also best for the other. Consequently, an untimely
conception would be equally disadvantageous for both of them
(Scene 16). Since the use of condoms is one way that both partners
can avoid conception, we might expect both the man and the woman
to be equally appreciative of their use. Even in a long-term
relationship, however, there is some difference between a man's and a
woman's liking for condoms. Why?
The main reason is that, as we have already discussed (Scene 2),
conception is not the main function of routine sex. Such sex is the
means by which a woman hides her fertile phase (Scene 2) while her
partner tries to keep her topped up with his sperm as a defence
against sperm warfare (Scenes 2, 4 and 6). Condoms do not spoil a
woman's subconscious rationale for having routine sex, but they do
spoil a man's. A woman can still hide her fertile phase via routine sex
whether a condom is used or not. Obviously, however, if the sperm a
man ejaculates do
LEARNING THE GROPES
not take up residence in the female's tract, they provide him with no
defence against sperm warfare.
It is not surprising, then, that even during routine sex men are
consciously and subconsciously less enthusiastic about the use of
condoms than women (Scene 17). Not least, men are much more
likely to advocate taking the occasional risk.
To understand why this difference in attitude is even more marked
during 'casual' sex, let us first consider the pressures on a woman
during casual sex and how these are affected by the use of a condom.
As we have already discussed (Scene 28), a woman is normally more
cautious and selective over casual sex than a man. All the same,
having decided on a suitable time, place and partner, she can still
gain a number of advantages from casual intercourse — as long as
she doesn't conceive (see Scenes 18, 20, 27 and 28). For example, if
she is without a long-term partner, intercourse can help her gain a
man's attention in her search for one. In addition, she can use the
intercourse to gauge a man's sexual competence, potency, and to
some extent health and fertility. Casual intercourse can thus be an
avenue to protection and financial or other help from a man who she
judges might be a suitable long-term partner. If she already has a
long-term partner, casual sex with somebody else can provide a
'reserve' — a man to move on to if her current relationship breaks up
(Scenes 16 and 19). None of these benefits from casual sex require
her to conceive. In fact, she retains more options if she does not
conceive. Only when she is specifically after a particular man's genes
(Scenes 6 and 26), or when she is trying to maneuver him into a longterm partnership by becoming pregnant (Scene 18), does she benefit
from conceiving as a result of casual intercourse. Except on these
occasions, therefore, a woman gains from the use of a condom during
casual sex. Condoms even help to reduce one of the potential costs of
casual sex, the risk of infection.
Of course, a man also benefits in this last respect. Otherwise,
though, the pressures on a man are quite different from those on a
woman. We discussed these pressures in detail in Scene 28 in
260 261SPERM WARS LEARNING THE GROPES
explaining why men are much more urgent, single-minded and
cavalier over casual sex than women. Briefly, intercourse with as
many women as possible is one of the main ways whereby a man can
enhance his reproductive success. Each child produced in this way is
a bonus to be added to that mainstay of his success — the children of
a long-term relationship. A man suffers very few costs from casual
sex that might erode this potential bonus. Harsh though it might
seem, all each conception needs to cost him is a few minutes of his
time, an ejaculate, and a slight risk of contracting a disease. If a
longer-term relationship with the mother is in his reproductive
interests, he may decide to offer paternal care. But if it is not, he may
simply leave her to raise the child (or not — Scene 16) as best she
can, while he pursues other sexual opportunities and seeks a more
promising long-term relationship.
The major problem a man encounters in trying to bolster his
reproductive success via casual sex is the difficulty of finding
enough women to cooperate with him. Few, if any, men get as many
opportunities for casual sex as they are programmed to seek-and
hence would like. When such opportunities do arise, they are
programmed to let as few pass by without insemination as possible
(Scene 28). Using a condom to remove all chance of conception thus
negates a man's fundamental reason for pursuing casual sex.
Subconsciously, his body realises the futility of casual sex with no
chance of conception — just as, again subconsciously, a woman's
body realises the power of casual sex with no chance of conception.
Yet, despite the apparent futility of their actions, men are sometimes
prepared to wear a condom on such occasions. Why?
One possibility is that a man's body is actually fooled by this
relatively recent invention into doing something that is against its
reproductive interests. It is programmed to assume that when he
ejaculates inside a woman the sperm will do their job. Perhaps,
despite the evidence from his conscious brain, his body refuses to
accept that a condom inevitably negates this assumption.
There is some evidence for this. Men still make all the same
topping-up (Scene 4) and warfare (Scene 6) adjustments to the
number of sperm they ejaculate during intercourse whether they are
wearing a condom or not. They probably ejaculate about 10 per cent
fewer sperm if they are wearing a condom, but the adjustments are
the same. This suggests that a man's body still 'thinks' his ejaculated
sperm may have a job to do — even if it is merely 'wishful thinking'
that on this occasion the condom may have accidentally come off or
burst.
Even if this were an error in the programming of the male body,
it would not be so surprising. Relatively few generations of men
have been exposed to the use of condoms. Consequently, the
generation game of natural selection (Scene 1) has had very little
time to re-program the male body appropriately. But even if we
found that men actually reduced their reproductive success through
their use of condoms, we should expect things to change over the
generations to come. Eventually, the human population should
become dominated by the descendants of men who used condoms
to enhance, not reduce, their reproductive success.
At first, it seems counter-intuitive that condoms could ever
enhance a man's reproductive success. Nevertheless, there are at
least three ways in which they might.
One way would be if a man could use condoms to trade
opportunities with a woman. He could offer to prevent conception
when they first have sex in exchange for the opportunity of
unprotected sex in the future (similar to the situation portrayed In
Scene 20). He could then use the protected occasions to convince the
woman that he really is a suitable mate. As a result, she might
consider risking unprotected sex with him at some time in the future.
Another way would be if the greater protection against infection
that condom use affords more than made up for any missed
opportunities to inseminate. Since the advent of AIDS, the power of
condoms to reduce the risk of disease has become widely known. It
is possible that a man who uses
262 263SPERM WARS
a condom strategically throughout his sexual life will on average
stay healthier and thus enjoy a greater reproductive success than a
man who does not.
The third way would be much more devious — to (mis)use the
condom to con women into being inseminated in a way that allows
some chance of fertilisation. If a hundred couples used condoms
properly for a whole year, no more than three of the women should
become pregnant. Yet, in practice up to twenty to thirty conceive.
This is nearly half the number (seventy-five) who conceive if they
use no modern form of contraception at all. The most likely
explanation for this relatively high failure rate is that condoms are
not used properly during routine sex. Whether the failures are true
accidents or whether the men concerned, like the young man in
Scene 29, deliberately use condoms carelessly is not known.
Whatever the explanation for failures during routine sex, the
failure rate will almost certainly be higher during casual sex. There
is little doubt that many men use condoms during casual sex in all
three of these ways. On several occasions, the young man in the
scene misused them to give himself a chance of fertilisation during
intercourse. On top of that, he used condoms to increase his number
of casual encounters. Through not having had a condom to hand, he
had missed two opportunities at intercourse, and never had another
chance to inseminate either of the two girls concerned. With a
condom in his pocket, though, he was able to take full advantage of
opportunities with six other girls. On one of these occasions, he
produced a child which the girl was probably going to be left to
raise as best she could. Quite possibly, he would not have had this
child or any of his other opportunities had he not offered to wear a
condom.
Maybe the young man in the scene is not so unusual. There is an
intriguing possibility that on average men are already using
condoms to enhance rather than reduce their reproductive success. If
so, their bodies' strategy is as follows. First, try to have unprotected
intercourse whenever possible. Secondly,
LEARNING THE GROPES
offer to use condoms, as a strategy to increase the number of
opportunities for intercourse. Thirdly, while wearing a condom,
continue to make all of the necessary topping-up (Scene 4) and
warfare (Scene 6) adjustments just in case the Condom bursts or
comes off. Finally, on occasion, deliberately ml\use condoms to
achieve 'sneaky' inseminations. Perhaps, through this strategy,
learned and instinctive dispositions have already combined to allow
the men who are prepared to use condoms to achieve a greater
reproductive success than men who are not.
Similar arguments can be advanced to explain withdrawal as a
male strategy. Of course, as far as casual sex is concerned the offer
of withdrawal gives a man far fewer opportunities for insemination
than the offer of a condom. As in Scene 29, a woman is far less
likely to accept the offer of the former than she is the latter. There
are two main reasons. First, withdrawal offers far less protection
against getting pregnant than a condom. Secondly, it provides less
protection against infection. As far as fertilisation is concerned,
once a man has succeeded in penetrating through offering to
withdraw, it is far easier for him to inseminate and fertilise than if
he uses a condom. This is illustrated by the fact that withdrawal as
a means of contraception has an even higher failure rate than the
condom. If our hundred couples used withdrawal for a year instead
of condoms, only seven would conceive if they used the method
properly. In practice, however, up to forty women would conceive.
In part, these failures happen because the few sperm that leak out of
the penis before the man withdraws are particularly fertile. Mainly,
they happen because men often fail to withdraw as promised.
Offering to withdraw rather than to use a condom provides a man
with fewer opportunities for intercourse, but a better chance of
fertilisation when those opportunities do arise. Quite possibly, the
relative success of the two ploys depends primarily on how
experienced is the woman. As the young man in the scene
discovered, once a woman has realised that she can be
264 265SPERM WARS
deceived by the promise of withdrawal, she is far less gullible. In
fact, most women are rarely deceived more than once, either by the
false promise of withdrawal or by a carelessly positioned condom.
When she has been conned once, she is likely thereafter to keep a
close eye on the whole operation.
Although, naturally, humans are the only animals to use condoms,
they are not the only animals to use withdrawal. Many apes and
monkeys are known to penetrate and thrust without ejaculation. To
what extent this behaviour is simply the male using his penis to
remove material from inside the female's vagina (Scene 21), and to
what extent it indicates a tacit agreement between the male and the
female not to inseminate — as in humans — is not known.
Whenever it is the latter, however, we can be certain that from time
to time female apes and monkeys are also conned by males, just like
their human counterparts.
CHAPTER TEN
One Way
or Another
Scene 30
Best of Both Worlds
The young teacher looked up from his marking as his two
daughters, aged six and seven, skipped over to kiss him goodnight,
herded from behind by his partner like two frisky lambs. One of the
girls wished him goodnight in her mother's native language, one in
his. Most of the time the household spoke his language but in
moments of tenderness or anger any one of them might slip into the
mother's tongue. When she returned from taking them to bed, he
abandoned his marking, witched on the television and sat next to her
on the settee. She put her legs over his knees and they sat, eyes on
the screen, idly stroking each other's hands and legs. He looked
sideways at her, stomach churning with a fear that had been with
him all day.
How could he tell her that their whole world might be on the verge
of collapse?
'I am Preggnent and its Yours,' the scribbled note had said,
thrust into his hand during the morning break. 'My dad says you
must giv us sum money or well tell on you.' The girl was fifteen and
only slightly more illiterate than most of her contemporaries at the
school. Precocious and from a tough family background she
nevertheless had the looks and bearing that would fire most
266 267SPERM WARS ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
men's fantasies — until she spoke. She had asked him for a lift one
hot summer's night after school. Foreign languages were his main
subject but he doubled as a Physical Education teacher. It was hot
that night and he hadn't bothered to change out of his shorts before
getting in his car to set off home.
He should have said no when she asked for a lift. He should have
told her to stop when she began to stroke his thigh as he drove. And
he should have told her to get out when she took off her knickers. But
he didn't. Instead he drove to waste ground by a disused warehouse, got
into the back seat, and allowed her to pull down his shorts and climb all
over him. Looking back, he remembered how expertly she had handled
his clothes and his genitals and doubted that she was a stranger to sex.
He also doubted that he was the father — assuming she really was
pregnant, of course. Maybe she had set up other men, other teachers,
then tried to blackmail them also. Maybe the threat was hollow and
nothing would happen if he ignored it. But maybe she and her father
were serious and he would have to either pay up or own up.
The fear gnawing at his stomach grew stronger. He wasn't yet
thirty and his finances were in a terrible state — still not recovered
from his years at college, his year abroad, and his year of teacher
training. He was still sending money abroad to support the child he
had fathered during his exchange year, just before meeting his
present partner. Although she had managed to get a part-time job
once their youngest daughter had started school, they were still in
debt. He wouldn't be able to pay a blackmail demand. His only
option, if the girl was serious, was to deny ever having had sex with
her and hope that nobody had seen them that evening.
In truth, it wasn't the note that really worried him. If it was merely
a case of his word against hers he would have little to worry about,
financially or legally. Nor was he unduly worried about how his
partner would react. Theirs was a free-and-easy relationship and she
had the sexually liberated attitude much more typical of her culture
than his. She knew of his child in her home country and, despite their
financial situation, had
never suggested he should not provide its mother with some support.
Though she didn't know the whole story, she knew he had not been
totally faithful to her. A combination of bad luck and imprudence
had led her to find out about the first of his three infidelities. But she
had forgiven him and within a month they were back to normality.
He suspected the same would happen again over this schoolgirl,
especially if he denied the whole thing completely.
No, his stomach was not churning from fear that his partner
would discover his past indiscretions with women and girls. It was
churning from fear that she would discover his philanderings with
men and boys. His panic was that in defending himself against the
girl's note, he might provoke people who knew the other half of his
very active sex life into talking. Even apart from the legal dangers,
which were serious, he doubted that his partner would stand by him
if she knew the whole story, despite her sexual awareness and
understanding.
His homosexual activity went back as far as he could remember.
He was about six years old the first time his uncle, his regular babysitter, climbed naked into his bed to cuddle him. The games they
played were 'their secret' which his mother 'wouldn't understand' and
which would make her 'very angry'. In any case, he enjoyed them.
He liked the smell and feel of his uncle's body, the way their genitals
reacted to each other's touch, and the way he could help his uncle
discharge. He was ten when he first experienced penetration and
twelve when he first penetrated his uncle.
His first homosexual experience with someone his own age was
with his cousin. They were both eleven when, playing in his bedroom
one day while his parents were out shopping, he had persuaded his
playmate that they should take off their clothes and wrestle. Within
minutes they both had erections and within the hour he was
educating his cousin in some of the techniques he had learned from
his uncle. By the time they were thirteen and both able to ejaculate
they were meeting at least once a week for mutual masturbation and
anal sex.
268 269SPERM WARS
He was still thirteen when he first had sex with a girl. A young
neighbour, the same age as himself, whom he had played with
throughout his childhood, had succumbed to his 'I'll show you what
I can do if you'll show me what you can do' routine. And he had a lot
to show her. The years of practice with his uncle and cousin had
given him a knowledge of the body and a sureness and confidence
of touch that most males do not acquire until twice his age. The
young girl came back, week after week, to have him stroke and
stimulate her, each time allowing him to go just that little bit further.
In the end, he was touching and caressing her naked body, anus and
genitals with his hands, mouth and penis at such length and so
exquisitely that her young body was having its first tingling
experiences of orgasm. Each week her climax was just that little bit
stronger, and each time they had the opportunity she wanted more of
the same. After three months he convinced her that she couldn't
have a baby from anal intercourse and that she would enjoy it, and
after several experiments, she did. Before the year was out, she had
asked him for vaginal intercourse as well and by the time he was
fourteen his sexual education was complete.
At college, four years later, he joined the gay scene, spending
many of his evenings in gay bars and clubs. For a year, he lived with
another man in a more or less monogamous relationship, though
both of them were occasionally unfaithful, mainly with other men
but from time to time with women also. There was never any
shortage of women around him, many of whom told him how much
better a lover he was than his straight contemporaries.
For his exchange year, he went abroad to study the foreign
language he intended to teach. The person in the flat next to his
happened to be a woman. They were lovers within days, even before
he had found the local gay community. And within three months she
had conceived — but not before he had been unfaithful to her with
the woman who was to become his long-term partner. Before the
end of the year, she too had conceived. Even while living with one
woman
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
and being unfaithful with another, he still managed from time to
time to slip away for casual homosexual sex without either woman
knowing. On balance, though, most of his sexual activity while
abroad was with women.
When he returned to college to begin his final year of study, he
renewed his activities in the gay community. He kept in touch with
both mothers of his children by letter, sending what little money he
could. After graduation, he moved to a new city to train as a
teacher. No sooner had he arrived than the woman who was now
his partner turned up on his doorstep with their five-month-old
daughter. She moved in with him and they had lived together ever
since. Occasionally, he still picked up a casual lover at a gay bar,
but his partner had never found out and as far as he knew she had
never suspected his bisexuality.
Six years ago, he had landed his job as a teacher in a rough and
depressed town with a high level of unemployment. He vowed to
himself that he would never do anything sexually that might
prejudice his career or make it more difficult for them to get out of
debt. And for three years he had managed to restrain himself. But
then, in successive years, he had succumbed to the charms of two
student teachers. The first, a young girl, his partner had detected.
The second, a young man, she did not. Both affairs lasted only a
month. Then, a year ago, he had responded to the tentative
advances of another male member of staff and had begun a longterm homosexual relationship, which was still continuing.
Under cover of playing squash, the two men had sex at least
weekly in the other man's flat. It was uncanny how similar his new
lover was in his moods, behaviour and responses to the girl he had
impregnated within a few months of arriving abroad. In addition to
sex with each other, the men would sometimes visit gay bars to
pick up other men or explore the streets and toilets for young male
prostitutes. For these diversions, they drove to the anonymity of the
nearest large city, about thirty minutes away.
The problem that was now haunting him began six months
270 271SPERM WARS ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
ago. With his male lover, he had visited the city to look for child
prostitutes. They had just picked up two boys when they chanced
across two thirteen-year-olds from their school who were soliciting.
It was difficult to know who was the most unnerved by the
encounter. His weekend was tense, as he worried about what might
happen. He relaxed a little when, back at school on the Monday, the
two boys approached him and said that they wouldn't tell if the
teachers didn't tell.
Such an alliance might have been stable if the other teacher
hadn't then begun inviting the boys to his flat and paying them for
sexual favours. One evening, when he called round on his lover, the
two boys were still there. The temptation of such a foursome was
too great for him, and he allowed himself to be recruited into their
games of sexual musical chairs. From then on, the four had met for
group sex more or less weekly. Sensing their increasing
ascendancy, the two boys had begun to ask for more and more
money. Just a week ago, they had asked an extortionate amount.
When he had refused to pay so much, they had begun to make
threats. Now, there was also the note from the girl and he was
scared, really scared.
As it turned out, his fear was justified. The girl wasn't lying and,
moreover, was determined to have the baby. When he refused to
pay her blackmail demand, her father sued him for maintenance. He
denied both paternity and ever having had sex with her, but was
legally forced into a test of paternity. The publicity surrounding the
case encouraged the two boys, now aged fourteen, to decide there
was money to be made from selling their story. They accused the
teacher and his lover of forcing them to take part in homosexual
orgies against their will.
The teacher had judged his partner correctly. She stood by him
during the early stages of the paternity case but left him when the
homosexual scandal broke, taking their two daughters back to her
own country. He never saw them again. Within a week of her
departure, the paternity test confirmed him as the father of the
schoolgirl's child. Following his arrest he was
tried and found guilty of having sexual intercourse with minors,
both male and female. He spent only a short time in jail, but II
WHS long enough for him to contract HIV from homosexual
activity with other inmates. Unemployed and penniless, he died of
AIDS just before his thirty-seventh birthday.
ost readers of this book will be exclusively heterosexual.
After a period of sexual exploration and mate selection
during late adolescence, they will reproduce within the context of
one or two successive long-term relationships. The men will have
sex over their lifetime with about a dozen women — and the
women with about eight men. On average, they will produce two
children and eventually four grandchildren.
A minority, though, will pursue their reproductive success in a
quite different way. A few will be bisexual, spending phases of
their life directing most if not all of their sexual attention towards
people of the same sex as themselves. Others will be very
promiscuous, having hundreds if not thousands of sexual partners
in their lifetime. Yet others, at the other end of the spectrum, will
only ever have sex with one person. And there will be some men
who will direct part of their sexual activity towards forcing women
they have never met before to have sex with them. Some of these
will band together in gangs before finding a woman to rape.
The conventional majority often find it difficult to understand
the minority who show these alternative strategies. Their Unusual
behaviour is often interpreted as an aberration. The sometimes
unpalatable truth of the matter is, however, that such minorities are
pursuing reproductive success just as vigorously and strategically
as the conventional majority. And we should not assume that just
because these alternatives strategies are uncommon they are
necessarily unsuccessful.
Each of the seven scenes in this chapter focuses on an area of
human sexuality in which people pursue an uncommon but often
successful reproductive strategy. In this first scene, we explore
272 273
MSPERM WARS ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
the way that male homosexual behaviour can be a successful
reproductive alternative to exclusive heterosexuality.
Any discussion of homosexuality is bedevilled by the ambiguity
of the words that are used. In the following pages, I shall use the
following conventions. A heterosexual is a man who only ever has
sex with women. An exclusive homosexual is a man who
throughout his entire life only ever has sex with other men. A
bisexual is a man who has sex with both men and women.
Homosexual behaviour, on the other hand, is the behaviour shown
towards other men — whether the man concerned is an exclusive
homosexual or a bisexual.
At first sight, homosexual behaviour might seem a strange way
to pursue reproductive success. It would seem particularly strange
if, like most people, we made the mistake of assuming that just
because a man is sexually attracted to other men, he is inevitably
less likely to reproduce. The evidence, in fact, indicates the
contrary. Far from being a pathway to a lower level of reproductive
success, homosexual inclination is very much a successful
reproductive alternative to heterosexuality.
Men who are attracted to other men do still reproduce — and on
the whole they reproduce very successfully. On average, every
person who reads this book will have had within the past five
generations — in other words, since about 1875 — a male ancestor
who practised homosexuality. This does not mean that we have all
inherited a predisposition for homosexual behaviour. Some will
have done, as we shall see, but only a minority. Nevertheless, it
does mean that none of us would be the person we are today if one
of our ancestors had not shown homosexual behaviour — and
reproduced.
Before we start to discuss just how homosexual behaviour can
aid a man in his pursuit of reproductive success, we must consider
four basic facts about male homosexuality that are not generally
known and that provide a most important perspective.
First, homosexual behaviour is not peculiar to humans. Adolescent birds and mammals often show such behaviour. Male
monkeys show the same range of homosexual behaviour as men,
from mutual caressing and masturbation to anal intercourse. There
are reports, for example, of a male monkey masturbating to
ejaculation while being penetrated anally by another male.
Secondly, as far as humans are concerned, homosexual behaviour
is shown by only a minority of men — at least in the largest and
most industrial societies. In Europe and the United States, for
example, only about 6 per cent of men experience any homosexual
contact during their lifetime, most often during Adolescence. For
two-thirds of those men, that contact is intimate and genital, often
involving anal intercourse.
Thirdly, in all birds and mammals, including men, the vast
majority of males who show homosexual behaviour are bisexual.
for example, male monkeys who have anal intercourse with oilier
males do not reduce their rate of intercourse with females. The
same is generally true for men. The vast majority (80 per cent) of
those who have sex with men also have sex with women. Many,
like the man in Scene 30, may have phases that are exclusively or
almost exclusively homosexual, but for fewer than 1 per cent of
men does this 'phase' last an entire lifetime.
Finally, there is now convincing evidence that homosexual
behaviour is inherited. Genetic inheritance is more often via the
mother than the father: for example, men with homosexual
inclinations are much more likely to have uncles and cousins with
similar inclinations on their mother's side than on their father's. In
the scene we have just witnessed, the man's uncle was more likely
to have been his mother's brother than his father's; his cousin was
more likely to have been the son of one his mother's brothers or
sisters than his father's.
A genetic basis to homosexual behaviour does not mean that the
circumstances encountered by boys during their childhood do not
also influence their behaviour. Boys genetically inclined towards
homosexual behaviour may not show that inclination in some
childhood situations but may do so in others. The man in the scene,
who almost certainly carried the genes
274 275SPERM WARS
for homosexual behaviour, might never have developed his
homosexual tendencies had it not been for his early relationship
with his uncle. The converse could also be true, though it should be
less common — boys without the genetic inclination may
nevertheless be seduced or forced into homosexual behaviour
during childhood. Modern evidence suggests that, more often than
not, exclusive homosexuals and bisexuals are born and not made.
This discovery provides an important clue for biologists in their
attempt to understand the evolution of homosexual behaviour. No
gene can persist in a population at the 6 per cent level unless on
average it imparts some reproductive advantage to the individual
concerned. Of course, a lifetime of exclusive homosexuality can
have no reproductive benefit — but bisexuality can. It seems most
likely that exclusive homosexuality is a genetic by-product of the
reproductively advantageous characteristic of bisexuality. If so,
homosexual behaviour joins the ranks of a number of other human
characteristics that are advantageous when a person has inherited a
few of the relevant genes, but disadvantageous if they have
inherited more.
The classic example of such a characteristic is sickle-cell
anaemia. In the tropics, a single level of the sickle-cell gene is
advantageous, endowing its possessor with increased resistance to
malaria compared to people without the gene. A double level of the
sickle-cell gene, however, condemns the possessor to an early death
and/or a lifetime of pain and suffering.
Of course, this comparison between the genetics of homosexual
behaviour and the genetics of sickle-cell anaemia should not be
misinterpreted: there is no implication here that the former, too, is a
disease. Rather, the anaemia is the best-studied example of a genetic
principle that could also be applied to the inheritance of
homosexual behaviour. We can think of bisexuals as having a small
number of the genes for homosexual behaviour, and exclusive
homosexuals as having a larger number — bisexuals have a
reproductive advantage relative to heterosexuals; exclusive
homosexuals never reproduce, and have a
276
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
reproductive disadvantage compared with both heterosexuals and
bisexuals.
So, how big is the advantage of bisexuality compared with a
lifetime of only ever having sex with women?
As far as children within long-term partnerships are concerned,
bisexual men have fewer children over their lifetime, but probably
have them earlier in life. The man in Scene 30 had two children
with his long-term partner, probably about average for the society in
which he lived. But he had them before he was twenty-three,
several years earlier than the average heterosexual. Such early
reproduction may not seem very advantageous, but it can be.
Biologists measure reproductive success not simply in terms of
number of children or grandchildren, but in terms of reproductive
rate. A person can have a higher reproductive rate than another
either by producing more children over a lifetime or by producing
the number of children but earlier. Although throughout most of this
book it has been adequate to discuss simply the pursuit of
reproductive success, it is crucial here to remember that when we
talk of reproductive success, we really mean productive rate.
It is difficult enough to compare the reproductive success of
different categories of men, such as bisexuals and heterosexuals,
even if we limit our comparison to long-term partnerships. The risk
of including children raised within those partnerships but fathered
by other men will always render such comparisons fragile. And our
attempt becomes impossible when we try to compare their further
success via short-term relationships with a number of women. Even
the women who produce the children may not always know who the
fathers are — so the men certainly won't. Yet it is precisely this
avenue to reproductive success that seems to be the most important
to bisexuals. The expectation is that such reproduction allows
bisexuals to achieve a greater reproductive success than
heterosexuals, but the evidence is Impossible to obtain.
Multiple partners, both male and female, are a feature of male
277SPERM WARS
bisexuality. Nearly a quarter of men who show homosexual
behaviour have more than ten male partners in a lifetime. For some
the figure can be in the hundreds. More importantly, though, the
more male partners a bisexual man has during his lifetime, the more
female partners he is also likely to have. Since, on average, a
bisexual man will inseminate more females over his lifetime than
will a heterosexual man, a bisexual man is more likely to have
children with different mothers.
The important question, of course, is whether the average
bisexual's success at attracting and seducing many different women
owes anything to his experiences with many different men. There
are probably three main ways why it might.
The first is that early learning with other boys gives the bisexual
a precocious sexual competence. Over 80 per cent of men who are
ever going to show homosexual behaviour have done so by the time
they are fifteen, and 98 per cent by the time they are twenty. Male
homosexuality is an activity that occurs most often during
adolescence or even childhood, whether with contemporaries or
with older men. To appreciate the difference in competence between
boys with homosexual experience and their heterosexual
contemporaries, compare, for example, the man in Scene 30 with
the man in Scene 27. The latter could scarcely manage intercourse,
even at nineteen, let alone cope with the subtleties of the female
orgasm. In contrast, even at thirteen the bisexual in Scene 30 could
seduce girls into intercourse. By nineteen, women were queuing for
his favours, and even in his mid-twenties his sexual aura made him
attractive to girls from the age of fifteen upwards. The result was
that, before his thirtieth birthday, he had fathered four children with
three different women — more than most men in his society manage
from a lifetime of heterosexuality.
The second way in which homosexual activity can aid
heterosexual success is by allowing practice with different personalities. Experience with multiple male partners of different
character types gives the bisexual an edge when interacting with
multiple female partners of different character types (Scene 36).
278
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
For example, the man in Scene 30 was aware of the similarity
between his final male lover and one of the women with whom he
had produced a child. Experience with one gave him experience at
handling a relationship with the other. In this case, he experienced
the woman before the man. When the reverse is true, experience
gained with a man of a particular character type can help the
bisexual to get the most out of a relationship with a woman of a
similar character type. The experience may help at all stages and
levels of that relationship — seduction, stimulation, social
interaction and even deception.
The final way in which homosexual activity can aid
heterosexual success is via infidelity from within a long-term
heterosexual relationship. Practice at being unfaithful to his female
partner with a man gives the bisexual experience at walking the
tightrope of infidelity with a woman. Although bisexual men
decrease their homosexual activity markedly as they leave
adolescence and begin relationships with women, their
homosexual inclination rarely disappears completely. A man with
a long-term female partner is as secretive about his homosexual
infidelity as he is about his heterosexual infidelity.
There is some advantage in practising infidelity with a man. The
long-term female partner of a bisexual is less successful at detecting
his homosexual infidelities than his heterosexual Infidelities (often
because she does not know he is bisexual). A woman who does not
know her partner's true sexuality is likely to assume that he is
heterosexual — because the majority of men are. Consequently, she
will usually feel less threatened by his relationships with other men
than by his relationships with women — the average man's
relationships with other men will be less likely to be sexual than his
relationships with women. Even on those occasions when her
partner's relationships with men are sexual, a woman has less to
lose, at least initially, than if he is unfaithful with a woman.
Although some of the costs of infidelity (Scenes 9 and 11), such as
risk of infection, still apply, most do not. For example, he will never
need to reduce his support for her In order to help maintain his
lover's child. He is probably
279SPERM WARS
also less likely to desert her to live with his lover if the latter is a
man.
So homosexual behaviour during adolescence and beyond can
give a man considerable reproductive advantages over his
heterosexual contemporaries. In which case, why is bisexuality not
more common?
The answer is relatively straightforward. There are costs to
bisexuality which can negate the benefits. The most important cost
of homosexual behaviour is a greater risk of disease. Even before
the advent of AIDS, homosexual behaviour brought with it an
increased risk of early death from sexually transmitted diseases,
such as syphilis. In effect, bisexuals are programmed by their genes
to pursue a lifestyle that trades the benefit of an earlier and perhaps
greater production of children (with more women) against the risk
of an early death.
Another cost is genetic — and here there is another parallel with
sickle-cell anaemia. Although people with a small number of the
genes may gain an immediate apparent advantage, as we have seen,
that advantage may not be as great as it seems. This is because,
compared with people without the genes at all, those with a small
number will produce descendants with a higher proportion of
individuals with a larger number. In other words, although
bisexuals produce more children and grandchildren at a faster rate
than heterosexuals, among those descendants there will be a few
exclusive homosexuals who in turn fail to reproduce at all.
Yet another cost arises because a proportion of the heterosexual
majority display homophobia — a prejudice against people who
show homosexual behaviour. Such prejudice is occasionally so
extreme and violent that any man suspected of homosexual
behaviour faces an increased risk of injury or even death. We
encountered a similar if less extreme prejudice in Scenes 12 and 13
in relation to masturbation. With masturbation, of course, such
prejudice is all bluff and hypocrisy — the intimidators being as
likely to masturbate as the intimidated. Inevitably, some
homophobes are also hypocrites, displaying
280
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
public homophobia while secretly behaving bisexually. On the
whole, though, most homophobes are part of the heterosexual
majority.
Whenever we encounter such common prejudice, it is usually
because the target is in some way a threat to the people showing the
prejudice. It is quite possible that homophobes, like bisexuals, are
themselves born not made — an inevitable evolutionary result of
the very success of bisexuality that we have just discussed. The
reproductive advantages enjoyed by bisexuals mean that they
should — for that reason alone — be regarded as a threat by the
surrounding heterosexuals. Unfortunately, the bisexual's role in the
spread of disease adds to this threat. So, just as we discussed for
masturbation (Scene 13), one defence for the surrounding
individuals is to try to reduce the bisexuals' reproductive advantages
through threat and intimidation.
The final picture, therefore, is that compared with their
heterosexual contemporaries, bisexuals experience both advantages
and disadvantages in their pursuit of reproductive success. In which
case, the important question becomes whether the total costs are
greater than the total benefits, or vice versa. Are bisexuals more
successful reproductively than heterosexuals — or are they less
successful? The answer is that it depends on how common bisexuals
are in the population. When they are rare, they are more successful
than heterosexuals. When they are common, they are less
successful. The reasons are as follows.
The advantage of bisexuality lies in its exponents potentially
having a higher rate of reproduction than the average for the society
in which they live. As we have noted, earlier and better learning of
sexual technique gives bisexuals a competitive advantage over other
men in gaining sexual access to women. The more bisexuals there
are in the population, however, the greater the chance that their
competitors are also bisexual — and the more common bisexuals
become, the less the advantage enjoyed by any one individual as a
result of his bisexuality. As the proportion of bisexuals in the
population increases,
281SPERM WARS
not only does the advantage of bisexuality decrease, but the costs
increase. Of the three costs discussed above, two — genetics and
disease — clearly increase as bisexuality becomes more common.
As far as the genetic risk is concerned, the more common the
genes for homosexual behaviour the greater the chance that any
two people will carry those genes, and thus the greater the chance
that a man and his partner will produce sons and grandsons who
are exclusively homosexual and will therefore fail to reproduce at
all. When it comes to the risk of disease, the greater the level of
homosexual activity in the population, the faster the spread of
disease. More people, both heterosexuals and bisexuals, will
become infected. But because bisexuals are always at greater risk
of contracting disease, they will suffer most. Thus, the chances that
any given bisexual will have an early death are greater.
We have seen that, in a population in which bisexuals are rare,
those who are bisexual enjoy considerable advantages over
heterosexuals. The result is that the genes for bisexuality increase
in proportion in the population. Conversely, as bisexual behaviour
becomes more common, the advantage enjoyed by bisexual
individuals decreases and the costs increase. If the behaviour
becomes too common, the reproductive rate of bisexuals falls
below that of heterosexuals, and the proportion of bisexuals in the
population begins to decrease once more.
The inevitable result of this interplay of costs and benefits as the
proportion of bisexuals rises and falls is that eventually the
proportion of bisexuals stabilises. Moreover, it stabilises at
precisely the level at which the average success of bisexual
behaviour in each generation is just the same as the average
success of heterosexual behaviour. Therefore, the answer to our
question — who does better reproductively, bisexuals or
heterosexuals? — is 'neither'. The only difference between the two
is that the reproductive success of bisexuals is more precarious —
they have a much greater chance of not reproducing at all.
However, if they successfully avoid being
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
killed by homophobes and contracting HIV, they also have the
potential to be very successful. On average, the greater risks and
the greater potential just balance each other.
The conclusion, therefore, is that in the larger, more industrial
societies the genes for bisexuality have stabilised at around 6 per
cent of the population because this is the level at which bisexual
and heterosexual men, on average, do equally well.
The situation would be very different, of course, if the costs of
bisexuality were never as great as the benefits, no matter how
common the bisexual genes became in the population. Suppose,
for example, there were some societies in which there was very
little risk of sexually transmitted disease. In such societies, the
benefits of bisexuality could always outweigh the costs, no matter
how many people used the strategy. We should expect the genes
for bisexuality to sweep through the whole population. Is it
conceivable that there have ever been societies in which there
were sufficiently few costs to bisexuality? The answer is yes.
So far in this discussion, we have concentrated on large
industrialised societies — which are uniquely unfavourable for the
wholesale spread and persistence of bisexuality. In particular, they
harbour and facilitate the spread of those sexually transmitted
diseases which generate the main costs of the strategy. The recent
emergence and spread of HIV and AIDS are merely the most
recent examples of a sequence of events that will have occurred
many times throughout human history. For example, from the
Middle Ages until the twentieth century syphilis was the major
sexually transmitted killer in the larger societies.
Historically, small, more isolated communities have harboured
relatively few diseases. Since the members of such communities
were the offspring of the survivors of past epidemics, they
inherited their ancestors' natural, perhaps genetic, Immunity. New
diseases rarely appeared because the people had little contact with
the outside world. When they did have such contact, few escaped
exposure to disease no matter what
282 283SPERM WARS
their behaviour. The survivors were again those with some form of
immunity — which they passed on to their offspring. Consequently,
before they encountered the outside world and were exposed to
measles, smallpox, syphilis and now AIDS, such small isolated
societies enjoyed long periods with little danger from disease. In
such circumstances, bisexuality would have carried nowhere near
the risks that it now does in larger societies, with the result that the
genes for bisexuality should have spread unchecked by disease. No
matter how common bisexuality became, its exponents would still
have reproduced faster than heterosexuals. It should be no surprise,
therefore, to find that many such communities when first
encountered and studied contained a far higher proportion of
bisexuals than the industrialised world. And it should be no
surprise, either, to find that, when the majority of people are
bisexual, homophobia either becomes much less common or
disappears completely.
As far as the level and tolerance of bisexuality are concerned, it
is the major industrialised societies that are the exception, not the
rule. Anthropologically, in 60 per cent of human societies
bisexuality is both common and socially accepted. Some societies,
such as certain small island communities in Melanesia, accept as
normal that all adolescent males will at some point engage in
homosexual anal intercourse. The women also accept that their
long-term partner will from time to time have sex with other men,
and they tolerate their partner's homosexual infidelity more than his
heterosexual infidelity. The usual attitude is that their partners can
continue with their homosexual activity as long as it does not
interfere with their heterosexual relationship. But even in these
societies, where all male adolescents have phases of homosexuality,
sometimes within short-term 'monogamous' relationships, exclusive
homosexuality over an entire lifetime is very rare. Homosexual
behaviour is very clearly part of a bisexual reproductive strategy.
Moreover, it is so successful a strategy that it has completely
displaced the heterosexuality that is the norm in larger, more
disease-prone societies.
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
SCENE 31
The Coming of Women
The girl rubbed the steam off the bathroom mirror so that she could
examine her face yet again. Reassuring herself for the fourth time
that evening that the spot on her chin had almost gone, she carried
on towelling herself dry. Twenty years old and she was still getting
spots — surely she must grow out of them soon? As she hung the
towel over the radiator, she noticed the nearly empty packet of
tampons on the shelf and smiled. Which one of them would make
the supreme effort and put it back in the cabinet this month? It was
a week since their periods had finished — strange how they tended
to coincide — and neither of them had yet managed to put the
packet away. Powdering herself, she felt her throat tightening.
Even after a year together she still got excited at the prospect of sex
with her partner. She had been looking forward to this all day and
there was a tingle between her legs already.
As she walked naked from the steamy bathroom to the dry heat
of the bedroom, her partner was already lying on the bed. Ten years
older than herself and the mother of a young child, she still had a
wonderful body. How much better it was to lie down next to a soft,
smooth, yielding and compliant woman than a muscular, urgent
and selfish man.
Immediately she was on the bed, they embraced and kissed. As
they did so, their hands slid expertly over each other's bodies,
lightly stroking here, lightly caressing there. From time to time one
would massage the other's breasts, play with a nipple, or gently
stroke pubic hair. Taking it in turns, they moved down each other's
bodies, kissing and licking as they went, each doing to the other
what she most wanted to be done to herself.
284 285SPERM WARS
After a while, the girl sat astride her partner, facing away from
her, then bent forward to lick her thighs and genitals. As she did
so, she raised her bottom in the air, presenting herself to her
partner's tongue. This was the bit she liked best. Whenever she felt
like an orgasm, this never failed to take her to the brink. As the
warm, wet tongue licked and probed her vaginal lips, then so
gently massaged her clitoris, she felt the sensations she had been
anticipating all day. They kept each other on a high for minutes as
they neared the edge but never crossed. Exquisite though they
both found oral sex, they rarely climaxed from that alone.
Finally, unable to wait for release any longer, she lay back
alongside her partner. Her momentary loss of focus soon passed as
they kissed deeply, each briefly tasting their own juices on the
other's tongue. As they kissed, their fingers stroked and probed
each other's wet vaginal lips, then massaged each other's clitoris.
Each knew exactly what to do. As the girl felt the flush spread
over her chest, throat and face she saw the same happening to her
lover. Their breathing became a gasping, their pulses raced, and
the sounds in their throats became louder and more urgent. For
one brief, wonderful moment they hovered on the brink, then
climaxed more or less simultaneously. It had easily lived up to the
day's anticipation. They settled into their usual post-orgasmic
embrace, hands now idly stroking each other's body. In the
seconds before drifting off to sleep, she thought how much more
expert they had become at giving each other orgasms since they
first started living together.
Normally, they slept for only fifteen minutes or so after sex,
but when she woke nearly an hour had passed. Her partner was
still asleep and it seemed cruel to wake her. Nevertheless, she was
beginning to fret. She had only an hour to get dressed and cross
town. Eventually, she could delay no longer and made to move
off the bed. Immediately, her lover woke and sleepily urged her to
stay a little longer, suggesting it wouldn't matter if she was a bit
late for her meeting. Sliding off the bed and going in search of
clothes, the girl said she wished
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
she could stay but really did not want to be late for the third week
in a row.
As she went into the bathroom, her partner shouted after her,
complaining that she always seemed to be out in the evenings these
days. She reminded her that in the beginning they were never out
of each other's company. That had been a year ago, the girl shouted
in reply. Coming back into the room, she reassured her companion
that once her exams were over, they could return to how they had
been. In the meantime, she couldn't afford to miss anything.
Before she left, her lover made her promise she wouldn't be
late.. Saying that she would do her best, but warning that she
would probably be dragged off for a drink once the meeting was
over, the girl left.
Once alone, the woman got up, still naked, and switched on ionic
music. Idly, she walked round the room. A moment of fear struck
her when she saw the letter on the shelf, reminding her to have a
repeat cervical smear tomorrow — abnormal cells, was that
serious? In an attempt at self-distraction, she picked up the framed
photograph of herself and the girl on holiday the previous summer,
both tanned, drunk and happy. Not far away on the shelf was a
photograph of herself with her young son. He was now ten years
old, but it was several months since she had seen him. Once she had
begun living openly with her current lover, his father had refused
her access, insisting on looking after the boy himself with his new
partner. If only he knew, she thought, that the boy almost certainly
wasn't his but, most likely, the product of a wild evening she had
spent in a hotel room with two men and a girl while he had been
away. Memories of that evening triggered the familiar tingle
between her legs. It was only an hour since her last climax, but the
minute she felt that sensation she knew she would masturbate
before the evening was over.
The girl got off the bus and walked into the restaurant. She was
late. She had known it would be a mistake to try to fit in sex before
leaving but had been desperate for an orgasm all day.
286

