As we have noted, helping a woman to climax during foreplay is,
on the whole, disadvantageous to the man. Unlike the climaxes
between sexual episodes that we have just discussed it is always
him, never another male, who is going to suffer lower sperm
retention. The other disadvantage here is that the longer he waits to
penetrate the greater the chance he will lose the opportunity —
either the couple could be disturbed, or she might change her mind
about allowing intercourse.
It is probably for these reasons that, as in many scenes in this
book, most men would prefer to enter a woman and begin
intercourse without trying to help her climax during foreplay. But
because women often have much to gain from a foreplay orgasm
(Scenes 24 to 25) and frequently seek a man's cooperation in
achieving one, the level and length of stimulation during foreplay is
one of the major areas of conflict between men and women during
their sexual encounters.
A man is most prepared to cooperate over foreplay orgasms when
he has least to lose, that is, when the woman either has no sperm in
her cervical crypts or when the inseminate he is about to produce has
little chance of becoming involved in sperm warfare; and when he
has least choice, that is, when the woman refuses to allow
penetration until she has had an orgasm during foreplay. So it is not
surprising that men are most likely to cooperate over a foreplay
orgasm when they have spent most time with their partner (so
infidelity is unlikely), and when the woman is most insistent. Even
having helped the woman
to climax during foreplay, however, a man often shows great
urgency in his attempts to penetrate and inseminate — because if he
succeeds within one to two minutes of the woman's climax he can
still bypass her cervical filter (Scene 25).
As we have seen time and time again, most of the strategies
shown by men and women in relation to ejaculation and orgasm are
subconscious — orchestrated by the body via sequences of mood,
libido and sensitivity to stimulation. Indeed, most of the behaviour
described in this book is similarly subconscious, the product of
genetic programming rather than cerebral rationalisation. But the
conscious element features none the less, as men and women learn
by trial and error how best to satisfy their feelings. Men have to
learn many things, from the basics of penetration to the subtleties of
the female orgasm. Women have to learn how to climax, how to
encourage men to help them to do so — and when and how to fake
it. Both sexes also have to learn the strategic subtleties of infidelity
and the prevention of infidelity; and how to select a mate, how to
court and seduce the selected mate, as well as how to avoid
unwanted attention.
The ability to learn all of these things both well and quickly,
making as few mistakes en route as possible, will have a big
influence on a person's reproductive success. Scenes 27 to 29 are
concerned with how men and women learn these necessary sexual
subtleties.
226 227LEARNING THE GROPES
CHAPTER NINE
Learning the
Gropes
SCENE 27
Practice Makes Quite Good
As the young man rolled off the girl beneath him on the bed, a pile
of coats and sweaters collapsed on top of him in the dark. He pushed
them away, on to the floor. He had done it. At long last, he had done
it. Without a shadow of a doubt, he had finally ejaculated inside a
woman.
He had come close twice before. The first time, when he was
sixteen, was during a heavy petting session with a girl two years
younger than himself. On that occasion, he had been content just to
ejaculate, and hadn't really tried to enter her. Then, last year, at a
party just like this one, he had tried again but failed. Convinced that
he was inside the girl, he had happily thrust away until he ejaculated.
It wasn't until afterwards that she had told him that all he had done
was thrust down between her buttocks and ejaculate on to the bed, or
maybe somebody's coat. This time, however, he had definitely
succeeded. Nineteen years old, and he had lost his virginity.
Admittedly it had been quick; at the most a few seconds, once he
was inside her. Admittedly, also, he had needed help. As on the
previous occasion, the prods of his penis had failed to find the girl's
vagina — though he wouldn't have known. Once again,
he had thought he was inside her and had begun thrusting. But when
she had taken hold of his penis and guided him in, the sensation was
so different that he realised he must have been somewhere else —
again, probably between her buttocks. He had nearly ejaculated
prematurely, but had hung on just long enough to push himself right
in. As he lay in the dark by her side, his sense of achievement and
satisfaction knew no bounds. He told her how fantastic it had been and
asked how it had been for her.
She said, 'Great' with a sarcasm that would have deflated anybody
but a first-timer. When she had first seen him at the party, she had
dismissed him as a prospect, thinking how young and inexperienced
he seemed. But when he homed in on her, she had changed her
mind. He was quite good-looking and his clothes were expensive.
His conversation had been a little immature and naive, but his witty
stories of achievement and failure had impressed her. When he had
brazenly asked her if she felt like having sex with him, she had been
just drunk and randy enough to think it might be a good idea. As
soon as they were in the dark room, he had more or less ripped off
her underwear. Then, he had missed out all foreplay, lain on her like
a dead weight, and prodded between her buttocks and the bed. Even
when she helped him inside her, he had ejaculated as soon as he was
in. Now he wanted praise. She felt embarrassed, annoyed and
sexually frustrated; she vowed that, next time, she would take more
notice of her first impressions.
Someone knocked on the bedroom door and, getting no response,
tried to push it open. When the bolt on the inside held, the
prospective intruder urged whoever was inside to hurry up,
reminding them that they weren't the only ones who needed the
room. When the girl began to shuffle around on the bed, the young
man asked her what she was doing, saying they needn't give up the
room just yet. It was so dark that neither could really see the other.
The girl said she was looking for her knickers, and could he
remember what he had done with them? He had put them on the
floor somewhere, he said, and would look for them in a minute;
there was no rush he repeated. Embarrassed
228 229SPERM WARS
that she had really allowed such a nonentity to have sex with her and
eager to put the experience out of her mind, the girl lied that she
needed to go to the toilet, and would he please help her to look?
Reluctantly, he pulled his pants and trousers up from around his
knees, fastened his zip, and got off the bed to help her.
In truth, he couldn't remember what he had done with her
knickers. He had been astounded that this girl, whoever she was, had
agreed to come into the bedroom in the first place. He had only
talked and danced with her for about an hour. Even once he had got
her into the bedroom, he was so certain that she would change her
mind any second that he had taken off her tights and knickers with the
speed of light, while she was still compliant. In his hurry, he could
have thrown her underwear anywhere.
He asked what colour her knickers were. When she said they were
black, it seemed clear that there was no chance of finding them
amongst all the coats and sweaters littering the room. He suggested
they switch on the light, but she told him to forget it, she would go
without. The next second she was at the door, fumbling with the bolt.
As the young man stumbled over the clothes towards her, the door
opened and she was gone. No sooner had she left than the next
couple were on their way in and he had to push past them. By the
time he was out of the door, the girl had escaped down the stairs and
immersed herself into a conversation.
Partly at first to avoid any further attention from the youth she had
just escaped, she attached herself to the oldest man at the party. He
was nearly thirty, ten years older than her. She knew who he was and
knew also his reputation as a womaniser. Good-looking and
reasonably successful, he told her he had managed to come to the
party only because his partner had gone to visit her mother for the
weekend. She stayed with him for the rest of the evening and became
totally captivated by his charm and gentleness, by his humour and
sensuality. When he suggested, as people began to leave, that she
should let him drive her home, she accepted. When she suggested, as
they
LEARNING THE GROPES
kissed in his car and his hand discovered she wasn't wearing any
underwear, that he should let her share his bed for the night, he
accepted. She spent the rest of the night, all the next morning and
part of the afternoon being kissed and stroked, pampered and
stimulated. Three times he brought her to orgasm and four times he
inseminated her. In between their love-makings she slept and
dreamed of a long relationship with him.
For a while after that weekend, she managed to live out her
dream. She remained the man's lover until she discovered that, as
well as his partner, he was having sex with at least one other girl
besides herself. Then she stopped meeting him.
At about the same time, her flatmate started seeing the young man
to whom she had lost her knickers on the night of the party. After the
pair had been an item for a few weeks, the girl's curiosity got the
better of her and she asked her flat mate what he was like in bed.
She could believe her friend when she said that at first he had known
nothing. Evidently, however, he was learning fast, and a few days
earlier he had actually found her clitoris. All he had to do now was
learn what to do with it — then, she thought, he might become quite
good. She had high hopes.
exual technique does not come instinctively to a man. It has to
be learned. In this respect he is no different from all male birds
and mammals. Arousal, erection and ejaculation are preprogrammed and automatic, but the niceties of sex have to be
acquired. If a male is ever to persuade a female to allow
insemination, he has to pick up the subtleties of courtship and
stimulation. He then has to learn how to copulate quickly and
efficiently so as not to miss the opportunities his courtship technique
has provided.
Male birds, for example, first have to learn how to stand on a
female's back, then how to bend their tails to press against her
genitalia before transferring sperm. Male mammals have to learn
what to do with their erections — where to put their
230 231
SSPERM WARS
LEARNING THE GROPES
penises. Even as intelligent an animal as an adult male chimpanzee
is totally inept if denied sexual opportunity during adolescence. His
sexual development depends first on watching others having sex,
and secondly on practising intercourse himself. In the company of a
female, an inexperienced adult male such as this becomes aroused
and erect but has no idea what else to do. He even has trouble
knowing which end of the female to approach with his penis, and
rarely succeeds in copulating on his first encounter or even on the
next few. Thus, if any male mammal is not to miss the first of his
lifetime opportunities to inseminate a female, he needs to practise
during adolescence — and human males are no exception. As the
youth in the scene discovered to his cost, failure to learn sexual
technique quickly during adolescence can soon result in missed
opportunities for insemination. And it can have an important
influence on a man's level of reproductive success. In all human
cultures, young males first hear and see the basics of sexual
technique from those with experience, either precocious peers or
older educators. In many cultures, sexual experimentation by
young, even pre-pubertal, boys and girls is openly encouraged or at
least condoned. A boy who learns early how to persuade a girl to
have sex with him, how to prepare her genitalia for penetration,
how to stimulate her to lubricate, and how to find and enter her
vagina with his erect penis will be less likely to miss his first
opportunities to reproduce. The youth in Scene 27 had his first
chance to learn sexual technique at sixteen years of age. This single
occasion was not enough. Two years later he missed his first
opportunity to inseminate a girl because he had not yet learned
either how to find her vagina with his penis or what it felt like once
he was inside. At nineteen, albeit with help, he managed to find a
girl's vagina and inseminate her, but even then his inexperience cost
him a full relationship with his conquest and, therefore, any further
sexual opportunities with her.
Of course, a man has to learn much more than simply how to
gain a woman's sexual interest, how to retain that interest
long enough to get the opportunity for intercourse, and where to put
his penis when the moment finally arrives. A man who can also learn
how to influence a woman's orgasm pattern has much more chance
of influencing her pattern of sperm retention (Scenes 24 to 26). But a
woman's body does little to make it easy for males to learn the
necessary techniques. In fact, it does the converse. Why? The answer
lies in mate selection, and the way in which women collect
information about men.
We have already discussed at some length the criteria by which a
woman selects a man (or men) to be her short- or long-term partner
(Scenes 18 to 21). There we considered the importance of a man's
status, behaviour, looks, fertility and sexual health. We also
discussed how most mate selection is a process of compromise; how
a man who can seem the best bet at one stage in a relationship may
not seem so later; and how a woman sometimes needs to balance a
man's visible qualities, such as his status and looks, against his less
visible qualities, such as his prowess in sperm warfare.
In order to collect information about a man, a woman in effect
needs to set him a series of tests. Depending on how many tests he
passes compared with other available candidates, she will then either
accept or reject him. She needs to set tests that are challenging but
not impossible. They are of no value to her if they are too easy, or if
they are so difficult that no man can pass them. A woman's body and
behaviour have been shaped to present such a test. And as often as
not the male quality being tested is his ability to learn how to use her
body and cope with her behaviour.
Learning is always more difficult when a given behaviour does
not always elicit the same response. The female response to any
particular male stimulus is notoriously unpredictable. This is true
from the earliest moments of courtship to the occurrence of orgasm
during intercourse. Not only do women differ (for good reason —
Scene 36), but individuals differ from occasion to occasion (again for
good reason — Scenes 24 and 25).
This variability allows the female to set challenging, but
233
232SPERM WARS
passable, tests for those males who satisfy their other mate-selection
criteria. Inevitably, these tests are most difficult for inexperienced
males. As an example, let us consider the position of the clitoris. As
we have already noted in humans, apes and many monkeys this
organ is small, difficult to find, and removed from direct stimulation
by the penis during intercourse (Scene 22). It can be stimulated by
some part of the male's anatomy during intercourse — usually the
penis — but unless the male knows exactly what to do it does not
have to be.
More than anything, stimulation of the clitoris during intercourse
depends on the stance or movement of the female, and so is much
more under female control than male. This is as true for humans as
for any other mammal, and it is not surprising in view of our
conclusions concerning the function of intercourse orgasm (Scene
25). This fact makes life extremely difficult for an inexperienced
male, as he struggles to learn the techniques of intercourse. If his own
behaviour sometimes does and sometimes does not stimulate the
woman, a man can only learn how to exploit this most powerful
source of sexual stimulation either from a great deal of trial and error
or from direct education by a woman. Even then a clitoral technique
that works with one woman does not necessarily work with another
(Scene 36).
On the night of Scene 27, the girl was looking for a long-term
partner (Scene 18), and as part of her selection procedure her body
was eager to test her chosen male's competence at intercourse.
Because he had at least learned something of courtship, the young
man passed her early tests and had a chance of passing her
intercourse test. He failed dismally. The more experienced man,
however, passed her tests at all levels. The girl probably preferred the
older man for many reasons, but one was undoubtedly his superior
sexual technique.
When asked why they like men who can stimulate them to
orgasm, women naturally reply in terms of the pleasure they gain
from orgasm. But the advantages a woman gains from selecting the
more competent men are biological as well as sensual. This
LEARNING THE GROPES
is despite the apparent disadvantage that, the more influence a man
has over her orgasm pattern, the less control she herself has. Yet we
have argued (Scenes 22 to 26) that a woman's control in this respect
is a major weapon in influencing her reproductive success. Is it
possible that this loss of control is more apparent than real ?
No man can force a woman to climax if her body does not want to.
A competent man simply helps her to climax when she does want an
orgasm. A less competent man forces her to do much more for herself
via masturbation and nocturnals. An experienced and competent man
is therefore a help, not a threat. But there is another aspect to the
female preference for more experienced males.
Basically, a woman uses a man's approach to foreplay and
intercourse to gain information about him. A man who is able to
arouse a woman and stimulate her to orgasm signals that he does
have past experience of other females. This tells her that other
women have also found him attractive enough to allow intercourse.
The more effectively he stimulates her the more experienced he
should be — and hence the greater the number of women who have
so far found him to be attractive. Mixing her genes with his,
therefore, may produce sons or grandsons who are also attractive to
women, hence increasing her reproductive success.
Interestingly, the females of some species of birds are also known
to use this yardstick during mate selection. If a female sees one or
more other females mating with a particular male, she also is more
likely to mate with him. So being seen to be attractive to other
females is an attractive male trait in its own right
Despite the difficulties, virtually all men eventually learn the
basics of intercourse, and most learn even the subtleties. But the
faster they are able to learn, the fewer opportunities for insemination
they will miss in their lifetime, and the more children they are likely
to father, with more women, than their slower-learning
contemporaries. Studies have shown that
234 235SPERM WARS
boys and girls who experiment most before puberty, particularly if
that experimentation involves genital contact, have more sexual
partners in their lifetime. Making the most of early opportunities for
sexual practice gives a young boy the edge over his contemporaries,
and ensures that in generations to come he will have more
descendants in the population.
Obviously, failure to practise when younger does not totally
condemn a young man to a life without successful intercourse. If a
girl or woman finds a man sufficiently desirable as a short- or longterm partner in other respects, she may tolerate inexperience, a lack
of consideration, and other sexual shortcomings. Mate selection is,
after all, a process of compromise (Scene 18). In Scene 27, the
flatmate undertook to educate the young man in the niceties of
intercourse. Her aim was to create a partner who, in addition to
qualities that she obviously quite liked, would be moderately
competent at helping her to climax when it suited her. While
educating him, she was also testing his ability to learn sexual
techniques. He was becoming 'quite good', suggesting that any sons
and grandsons he might give her would also be at least 'quite good'.
Importantly, in educating him to help her to climax, she was not
educating him to help other women to climax — or, at least, not to
the same extent (Scene 36). He would learn something from her, but
not as much as it might seem.
In this discussion, we have concentrated on the sexual
development of young males as they struggle to pass the tests created
by women in the name of mate selection. Although young women
have far less to learn about the basics of intercourse than young men,
they do need to learn how to recognise and act upon the urges
generated by their bodies. For example, a girl has much to learn
about how to masturbate and when to do so — or not. She also has to
learn how and when to seek a man's cooperation in stimulating
orgasm during foreplay, intercourse and post-play. Finally, she has a
great deal to learn about the techniques of deception and reassurance
within relationships.
236
LEARNING THE GROPES
Her urges to do all of these things will be orchestrated
subconsciously by her body, but the expertise she develops in
satisfying these urges will depend on her ability to learn — and to
learn quickly. Failure to learn sexual technique quickly is unlikely to
make a woman miss opportunities for insemination as clearly as
inexperience may do for a man. Nevertheless, it will influence the
extent to which she makes the most of the opportunities that present
themselves. Not least, the efficiency with which she learns will
influence her ability to make the most of sperm warfare.
We discuss this learning process for women in Scene 31. First, we
look at the dangers and repercussions of the way in which women test
male sexual prowess in the early stages of courtship.
SCENE 18
Rough and Tumble
The four teenagers walked noisily through the summer wood,
sheltered at last from the scorching early afternoon sun by the heavily
leafed trees. Ahead of them, squirrels skittered off the path and birds
flew into the bushes, sounding their alarm calls. Nobody had trodden
this path for a while.
One of the two boys had recently passed his driving test and had
borrowed his mother's car for the day. They had parked by the side of
the road, and for the past fifteen minutes had been walking through
the wood on their way to a place known to one of the girls. At first,
they had made their way along the narrow path in pairs, the darkhaired couple at the front, the second boy and his girlfriend behind.
Each couple walked hand in hand. But when the path widened out,
they broke up. The boys had taken off their shirts and, on some
pretext, had started to flail each other with them. Then they had run
off, chasing
237SPERM WARS
each other among the trees. The two girls linked arms and, bending
towards each other as they went, whispered comments about the
boys' bodies and behaviour, laughing loudly each time one of them
said something particularly wicked.
Leaving the two boys to their games, the girls continued round a
bend in the path. Ahead of them in a small, sunlit clearing, a narrow,
grass-covered wooden bridge carried the path across a river. Had the
girls known what was to happen over the next few hours, they might
have thought that the dark pine plantation into which the river flowed
looked menacing. As it was, they found the place cool and beautiful.
The river was shallow, and the pebbles on its bed made the water
babble soothingly as it flowed along.
This sound of running water was the perfect antidote to the heat of
the day. Even better, just before the river bent under the bridge and
into the plantation, the water formed a large shallow pool just over a
metre deep.
As the girls approached the pool, they were overtaken by their two
companions, now breathless from their exertions. The dark-haired
one stopped at the edge, quickly stripped to his swimming shorts and
jumped in, immediately at ease in the cold water. The girls were
much slower stripping down to their bikinis and he grew impatient,
splashing and throwing water in their direction, provoking shrieks of
'No', 'Stop it!' and 'Don't do that!' There was much running
backwards and forwards as, each time they approached, he splashed
them. Profanities flew amidst the shrieks of shock and laughter. In
the end, the two girls jumped in and began to exact wet and cold
revenge on their antagonist.
The second boy watched from the river bank and slowly stripped
down to his shorts. He had been dreading this moment. He couldn't
swim and in truth had a phobia about water. He would have been
able to cope on his own, but with all the horseplay going on he was
secretly terrified. There was no way he could go into the water with
the others. He sat and watched their fun and waited nervously for the
inevitable.
LEARNING THE GROPES
He secretly envied the dark-haired boy; envied his muscular bulk,
his athleticism — and his ability to swim. He was like a magnet to
girls. At parties they would cluster around him, hanging on his every
word, laughing loudly at his jokes, each trying to make him notice
her. According to rumour he had had sex with almost every attractive
girl in their circle, even with the second boy's own current girlfriend.
He, on the other hand, was still a virgin. He hadn't even been able to
persuade his girlfriend, no stranger to sex, to let him enter her. She
didn't mind his fingers inside her and she happily played with him until
he ejaculated, but not once in three months had she let him have
intercourse.
One of the few from their group who had not so far had sex with
the dark-haired boy was the dark-haired girl who was with him today.
She was in many ways the most attractive girl in their year at school.
Until today, though, she had tended to distance herself socially, and
was usually to be seen being driven around by older men. None of
these escorts had ever lasted long, and rumour had it that she was still
a virgin and something of a tease. She had always refused to go out
with anyone her own age, even the dark-haired boy. Today, however,
his persistence had been rewarded when at last she had accepted his
invitation. As the second boy watched her white bikini go virtually
transparent as it became wet, he had to accept that really she was
much more attractive than his own girlfriend. As he watched the two
girls playing with and making up to the lad in the water, he grew
more and more jealous.
The other three knew that he couldn't swim, but underestimated his
fear of water. They urged him to join them, pointing out that it wasn't
really very deep. As he continued to decline, they grew irritated and
impatient. Even his girlfriend, embarrassed by how badly he was
measuring up to the other boy, became annoyed. Although she
genuinely enjoyed her boyfriend's company, she was much more
attracted to the dark-haired one. A few months ago she had had sex
with him, but he had dropped her almost immediately. For a while
she
238 239SPERM WARS LEARNING THE GROPES
had been inconsolable, and she still hadn't really given up hope that
one day she would get him back. At this moment she was much more
concerned about flirting with him than with her boyfriend. When the
other two decided it was time to force her boyfriend into the water,
she actually joined them. They scrambled out, grabbed hold of his
feet and hands and, despite his obvious fear and genuine pleadings,
threw him into the pool. Trying hard not to show his panic, he
quickly climbed back out of the water, swore at his companions, then
settled back on the river bank.
Eventually, his girlfriend came and sat with him and soon
everybody was out, warming up in the sun. After a short, quiet spell
he started to throw grass stalks at the other boy. There was another
chase, and an uneven wrestling match which he easily lost. When
they returned, it was the girls' turn to throw vegetation at the darkhaired boy. He threatened recrimination, went down to the river,
cupped his hands to get a handful of water, and threw it at the two
girls amidst shrieks of laughter. They retaliated by joining forces and
pushing him into the water. Then they jumped in after him and the
fray continued.
The other boy sat, watched and envied. Amidst all the splashing
and shouting, he heard his girlfriend say she was going to pull down
the dark-haired boy's shorts. Soon both of the girls were wrestling
with him. As soon as he realised what was happening, he grabbed his
shorts, shouting, 'No . . . stop it!' and swearing loudly. The other boy
watched, a jealous half-smile on his face, wishing something like this
would happen to him once in a while.
The dark-haired boy was excited. The idea of losing his shorts to
the two girls appealed to him, but he still fought and protested. He
yelled, 'No!' a few more times, swore, insisted his shorts would tear,
and then when he felt he had protested long enough stopped
struggling and let them have their way. It was the other boy's
girlfriend who completed the job, waving her trophy excitedly in the
air. When he grabbed at his shorts, she threw them to the other girl.
The dark-haired boy and the other
one's girlfriend collapsed in a heap into the water. Meanwhile, the
dark-haired girl climbed out of the pool, picked up her boyfriend's
other clothes, and disappeared with them into the woods. The naked
boy was so busy playfully wrestling with the other boy's girlfriend
and getting aroused that he didn't notice what was happening on the
bank — until his own girlfriend reappeared. When he realised what
had happened he sank back into the water to hide his erection, while
he worked out what to do next.
After listening to the jokes and the accusations of cowardice for
not standing up, he turned to his girlfriend, urging her to get his
clothes for him. However, despite good-humoured banter and
threats, she refused to cooperate. False irritation crept into his voice
and, eventually, he announced that he didn't care who saw him 'with
a hard-on' and that his girlfriend was going to pay. With that, he
swam towards the bank and clambered out of the water. His
girlfriend stood for a second, frozen with excitement and indecision.
Then, as he stood facing her on the bank, she began to run up the
path towards the bridge. The boy gave chase. The pair were only just
in view of the others when he caught her, wrestled her to the ground
and sat astride her, pinning her arms to the ground. They were both
breathless. She was laughing, but he was not. Still visibly excited, he
was on the verge of losing control.
He asked where she had hidden his clothes. She said he had to
find them. He put his hand on her bikini top and said that if she
didn't show him where they were, he would take it off. She
pretended to give in, saying she would show him where they were,
but as soon as he let her stand up she went to run off again,
laughing. He grabbed her, put one hand on the back of her neck,
twisted an arm behind her back, and asked her again to show him.
She protested that he was hurting her. He wouldn't let go until she
showed him his clothes, he said, and began to frog-march her into
the wood, heading back to the place where he thought she had taken
them. They disappeared into the trees.
240 241SPERM WARS
The other boy's girlfriend had become aroused by her close contact
with the dark-haired boy, memories returning of the occasion they
had had sex. Disappointed at his departure, she redirected her arousal
towards her boyfriend. She reached out her hand to pull him to his
feet, and suggested that they too went for a walk. Once he was
standing up, he pulled her cold, wet body against him and kissed her.
When she felt him becoming aroused, she suggested again that they
move on in case the others came back. They walked a short way until
they found a secluded spot on the river bank and lay down hidden
from the path by vegetation. When he complained that their wet
clothes were uncomfortable and that they should take them off, she
agreed. For the first time since they had met they could actually see
each other's nakedness, instead of fumbling with each other in the
dark of his mother's car. He knew she was on the pill, and assumed
that at last they were going to go the whole way. She assumed that, as
he had always restrained himself in the past, he would do so again.
At first, their petting followed its usual course. He kissed and
stroked her rapidly warming skin. She stroked his back. He fiddled
inexpertly with her genitals, she held his penis in her hand. He said
he didn't want to come yet, and moved to get on top of her. When she
complained, he said he just wanted to rub himself against her. She
said she didn't want him to. He urged her to let him, and eventually
she relented. After a few seconds on top, he said he wanted to enter
her. She said no. He pleaded, she refused. He asked why she had let
his dark-haired friend have sex with her but wouldn't let him. She
hadn't wanted to have sex with the other boy, she lied. Anyway —
and she said this with more honesty — he hadn't given her much
choice.
It was the last straw. Lying naked in the sun, on top of a naked
girl, his penis no more than a thrust away from her vagina, he was
more aroused than he had ever thought possible. All afternoon, he
had felt inadequate and suspected, correctly, that his girlfriend still
preferred his friend to him. Now he learned
LEARNING THE GROPES
what her preference was despite the fact that he had actually (forced
her to have sex. The cocktail of emotions was tipping him over the
edge. He wanted sex with her, and he was going to have it. If his
friend could force her, so could he. If she could still like his friend
despite his forcing her, she would still like him. He moved his body
down just the distance necessary to push himself in — and missed.
As soon as the girl realised what he was trying to do, she told him
to stop and began to struggle. Briefly he pleaded with her to let him
in, but when she still said no he used his weight and Strength to pin
her to the ground. They struggled as he tried both to hold her down
and to find her vagina. He stabbed and slabbed with his penis, but
kept missing. Slowly it dawned on the girl that, unlike his friend, he
didn't know what he was doing. He had the strength, and the weight,
but not the experience. He was trying everywhere but the right place.
She carried on biting and scratching and angrily protesting, while
subtly changing her position to try to make penetration easier for him.
But it was too late. The feelings of frustration and inadequacy
merged into panic in the young boy's body. He still wasn't inside her,
and he couldn't hold off ejaculation any longer. As the spurts came,
the semen running down between her buttocks on to the grass, he felt
totally pathetic. He had risked all, and failed.
For a few brief moments, the girl went quiet. Then her emotions
took over. The mixture of fear and sexual excitement she had
experienced as they struggled, the lack of release through either
penetration or orgasm, and the disdain for him that had been growing
throughout the afternoon — all erupted in anger. At every step
during the last few hours he had dwindled in stature in comparison
with his friend. She called him a bastard, told him he was pathetic,
taunted him that he couldn't even manage to rape her, and said she
was going to report him.
As she pulled on her bikini and moved to stand up, he shrank still
further in her eyes. Post-climactic release had removed all trace of
aggression and pride, and there were tears in his eyes.
242 243SPERM WARS LEARNING THE GROPES
He apologised, said it wouldn't happen again, and begged her not to
tell anybody. As an afterthought he said he wasn't really trying to
enter her, that of course he would have succeeded if he had really
meant to, and that it was just a game. He must think she was stupid if
he thought she or anybody else would believe that, she told him — he
was going to get what he deserved. With that, she threw his wet
shorts at him, told him to cover his pathetic prick, and stalked off
saying she was going to find the others and tell them what had
happened.
Even if she had found them, the others wouldn't have been
interested as they had just acted out a drama of their own. The naked
dark-haired boy, penis still erect, had frog-marched the girl through
the pine trees to the place where she said she had hidden his clothes.
She had taken him into the darkness of the plantation. There was a
soft bed of sweet-smelling pine needles beneath their feet, and they
were hidden from the sky and the path by a regiment of ten-year-old
trees. Both were high on the emotions of the past few minutes. The
wrestling in the water as they had struggled with his shorts; the
chasing, the arm-twisting, their state of undress — had all combined
to produce in each of them a high of sexual excitement. There was no
question in the boy's mind but that when she had shown him where
his clothes were, they were going to have sex. For him, there could be
no other outcome. Sexual excitement always aroused in him
aggression and an urge to dominate, even hurt. This happened every
time he had sex, even without the rough-and-tumble foreplay and
teasing he had experienced today. He wanted sex with this girl, but he
also had a strong urge to humiliate her in the same way as she had
tried to humiliate him.
The girl continued to feed off his frustration, aggression and
visible excitement. The rumours about her were true. She was still a
virgin. Fingers, but not penises, had been in her vagina. In truth, she
had a fear of real penetration, a fear that her vagina would split —
the thought had kept her awake many nights. Yet, at the same time,
she had a high level of sexual motivation. She masturbated often and
enjoyed close contact with the male
body. More than anything, she relished her mounting tension as she
waited for the moment to deny penetration to a male who had
aroused himself with her body. She knew this boy's reputation for
roughness and aggression during sex. He had, after all, had sex with
nearly all of her friends over the past Bar. Nevertheless, she was
convinced she could handle him.
When she pretended just one time too many that she couldn't
remember where she had put his clothes, and then laughed at him,
she gave him the excuse he was looking for. Again he twisted her
arm behind her back until it hurt, pulled her against him, and asked
where his clothes were. Still thinking he was joking, she repeated
that she couldn't remember and complained that he was hurting. The
next second she was on the ground, face down on the soft bed of pine
needles, and he was taking off her bikini, almost standing her on her
head in his urgency to pull off her bottom half. For a few moments
she was shocked, but still thought it was play. But when he sat
astride her buttocks, put both arms up her back so it hurt, and pressed
her face into the pine needles so that she could hardly breathe, her
excitement rapidly began to fade. He was going too far and hurting
her too much.
He told her that if he got his clothes now, she might just get her
clothes back before the afternoon was over. He grabbed hold of her
hair, raised her head off the ground, and asked again. She said OK,
but to stop hurting her. When he released an arm, she indicated a
fallen branch ahead, about waist high. He dragged her to her feet,
once more pulling both of her arms behind her and pinning them
painfully against her back. Then he marched her over to the fallen
branch, pushed her stomach against it, forced her to bend forward,
and asked where. She cried that he was hurting her, pleaded with him
to stop, and told him exactly where the clothes were. He saw them,
and then told her he would teach her not to mess him about again.
She was hurting where the branch was grazing her stomach and
from the way he was pushing her arms up her back with his left hand,
but still she didn't realise what he was about to do. So
244 245SPERM WARS LEARNING THE GROPES
far, everything had been physical, not sexual, and although she was
in pain and surprised at how powerless she was to resist his strength,
she was still exhilarated rather than afraid. It wasn't until he began to
push her legs apart with his feet that fear suddenly gripped her
stomach. Almost before she could find the words to ask him what he
was doing, he was inside her. She told him she wasn't on the pill and
begged him to stop. When she tried to cry out, the sound stuck in her
throat. The force with which he was pressing her down over the
branch and the pain from her arms, stomach and virginal vagina took
her breath away. Each thrust was agony. She began to cry, and again
and again begged him to stop. He didn't, but at least he ejaculated
quickly.
With ejaculation, his aggression faded. He told her how good it
had been and that she was the best yet. He said he was sorry if he had
hurt her, lifted her gently off the branch, and tried to pull her towards
him to hug her. She resisted. He was a bastard, she sobbed, and he
had hurt her. He stroked her head, kissed her tears, and told her that
he really hadn't meant to hurt her; that he thought she had wanted it
to be like that. For a while, they sat with their backs against a tree,
him with his arm round her shoulders. She stopped crying, went very
quiet, and began sucking her thumb. She was in pain, both mentally
and physically, and at a complete loss as to what to do. Three
thoughts kept going through her head: she had been raped; she was
no longer a virgin; and her vagina could take a penis after all, even if
it hurt.
He spoke intermittently, saying at least three times how good it
had been and how much he liked her. Just once, she accused him of
raping her. He laughed and said that he supposed it was a bit like a
rape. She said it wasn't a bit like rape, it was rape. A little later, she
said he should have used a condom. He apologised, said he had
brought some and that they were in the pocket of the trousers she had
hidden. Then he said she shouldn't have got him so excited, and in
the next breath tried to reassure her over pregnancy and AIDS.
Eventually, they
got dressed and made their way back to the river to join their
friends.
During the walk back to the car and on the drive home, the two
girls and the boy who was driving were very quiet and withdrawn.
Only the dark-haired boy chattered as if nothing had happened. Later
that evening, with the boys gone, the two girls Confided in each
other. The driver's girlfriend triggered their conversation by saying
that she had been raped. She claimed it was the second time and told
her friend about her previous experience with the dark-haired boy.
Her friend then described her afternoon.
They compared notes on what the dark-haired boy had done to
them. Then they told each other the rumours they had heard about
his treatment of some of their friends. They mused over why he
forced girls when most of them, given time, would happily have sex
with him anyway. Not very seriously, they considered reporting him
to the police, to stop him raping others. Perhaps they should both go
and report both of the boys for the afternoon's incidents. They talked
through the possible scenario at the police station, but decided that
the experience might be worse than the actual rape. Besides which, it
would mean their parents would find out and they would probably
never be allowed out again.
The driver's girlfriend had no more to do with him, and within
days began going out with another boy who had his own car.
Whenever she met him, she snubbed him or called him a rapist. She
never missed an opportunity to tell her friends how pathetic he was
and how she couldn't understand why she had gone out with him in
the first place. Once away at college, he rarely came home, anxious
to avoid the people who thought so little of him.
The day after the other girl lost her virginity, she went on the pill
and, after turning the dark-haired boy down twice, eventually agreed
to go out with him again. They carried on seeing each other for the
rest of the summer, the longest he had ever stayed with anybody. She
gained the appropriate kudos and
246 247SPERM WARS
aroused the jealousy of her friends for having landed the boy they all
wanted. Despite occasional infidelities while at college, they
continued to see each other on and off for the next three years.
Eventually they began to live together.
Their first intercourse in the pine wood set the style for their
sexual relationship. In the years that followed, they re-enacted that
and similar scenes with mutual consent. For them, intercourse was
almost always aggressive and often painful. They enjoyed devising
outrageous scenarios to generate fear and humiliation as a prelude to
it.
Four years after beginning to live together, they had their first
child.
ough-and-tumble sex play is a common element in the
courtship of humans and of many other animals, as they make
decisions about whether to have intercourse or not. Such behaviour
has many facets, most of which are illustrated in the scene — and all
of them involve an interplay between mate selection by females and
the display of quality by males. The females set tests of physical
strength and sexual competence (Scene 27), which the males then
either pass or fail. In their pursuit of reproductive success, the
judicious use of rough and tumble can have important benefits for a
woman — and a satisfactory performance can be equally beneficial
to a man.
On the vast majority of occasions, such rough-and-tumble games
unfold without any harm being suffered by either the woman or the
man. In fact, they both gain. The woman gets the information she
wants and the man, if he behaves satisfactorily, may be allowed to
have intercourse. Occasionally, however, such games can be
dangerous. It is a short step from rough-and-tumble intercourse,
across the boundary of mutual consent, to rape. This is date rape —
when intercourse is forced by a man on a woman who has at least
found him attractive enough to 'date', and often attractive enough to
kiss and 'pet'. It is not the random, predatory rape by
LEARNING THE GROPES
a man who is usually a complete stranger to his victim (Stone 33).
In principle, it should be easy to draw an unambiguous line
between rough-and-tumble intercourse and date rape. If a woman
says no, but the man forces intercourse anyway, then the intercourse
was a rape. However, as all legal systems round the world
acknowledge, the situation is not that simple. One of the problems is
that, in many aspects of life, people often say no when what they
really mean is 'See if you can persuade me.'
In Scene 28, we saw five incidents in which people said no. On
two of these occasions they appeared to mean it, and on three they
didn't. First, the girls told the dark-haired boy not to splash them, but
they didn't mean it and within a few minutes were enjoying their
retaliation. Secondly, the other boy had a genuine fear of the water,
said no when invited to join the Others, and pleaded not to be thrown
in. The other three underestimated his fear, ignored his pleas, and
threw him in. Thirdly, the dark-haired boy at first did not want to lose
his shorts, said no, and fought to keep them. He soon changed his
mind and decided that he would like to lose them. Nevertheless, he
continued to say no and to struggle. Fourthly, the other boy's
girlfriend resisted her boyfriend's attempts at intercourse. She \aid no
and struggled. But when she realised he wasn't capable of forcing
intercourse she changed her mind at the very last minute and tried to
help him penetrate. Yet she continued to struggle and say no. Finally,
the dark-haired girl had a genuine fear of penetration. Although she
had enjoyed the rough and tumble, she said no at the first indication
that the boy intended to force intercourse, and struggled and pleaded
thereafter as best she could. Underestimating her fear and not
believing that she really meant no, he ignored her pleas and
inseminated her.
At first sight, the second and fifth of these events fit into one
category, and the remainder into another. Unfortunately, the situation
is not that simple. As far as date rape is concerned, there is a further
complication — the reaction of girls who have been date-raped in the
weeks that follow their experience.
248 249
RSPERM WARS LEARNING THE GROPES
In a study of American students published in 1982, it was found
that girls who were exposed to an attempt at date rape were three
times more likely to resume their relationship with the man
concerned if his attempt succeeded than if it failed. Presumably, the
fact that all of these women had claimed the man had attempted rape
means that at the time they said no and meant no. Yet, if the man
succeeded in forcing intercourse, nearly half (40 per cent) later
resumed their relationship with him, just like the dark-haired girl in
the scene. If he failed, then nearly nine out of every ten of the women
(87 per cent) refused to have any more to do with him, just like the
girlfriend of the less popular boy in the scene.
This reaction of women makes it even more difficult to draw the
line between date rape and rough-and-tumble intercourse. In the
discussion that follows, we shall make no further attempt to
distinguish between the two — that is a job for the legal profession,
not a biologist. The phenomenon under discussion is rough-andtumble intercourse, and the arguments that follow are concerned with
the influence this behaviour may have on male and female
reproductive success.
In Scene 27, we discussed how much men and women have to
learn in order to get the most out of their earliest sexual
opportunities. We also discussed the link between learning and mate
selection, particularly the way that a female needs to set tests of
competence for males as part of her process of selecting.
This testing is an important process — a woman uses it to identify
which men will give her sexually competent sons and grand-sons.
But when such testing involves rough-and-tumble sex play, as in
Scene 28, it can become a dangerous business. Nevertheless, even in
the scene, both girls survived relatively unscathed and both came to a
decision about their respective partners. To judge from each girl's
subsequent behaviour, one of the boys passed that afternoon's tests,
the other failed. So what were these tests, and what insight do they
give us into the function of rough-and-tumble sex play in humans
and other animals?
Before we can answer this question, we have to be clear over
precisely how a man and woman's interests differ when they begin
such behaviour. Many of the important factors are touched on
elsewhere in this book, but in the discussion that follows they
become crucial — and this is because here we are primarily
concerned, as in the scene, with a couple's first Intercourse.
Once a man and woman have established a long-term
relationship, the costs and benefits that they each experience from
intercourse become similar (Scene 16), even though the (unction
may differ (Scene 2). But with first-time intercourse the situation is
very different. Apart from the chance of contracting disease, which
is a risk they share, their potential costs and benefits are not at all
the same — especially if there is a strong possibility that their first
intercourse together may also be their last. A man, like all male
animals, has much less to lose and much more to gain from a oneoff intercourse than a woman.
From the viewpoint of reproductive success, and disregarding
here any social pressures to which the man may be exposed, the
siring of a child with a woman other than a long-term partner need
not be expensive for him (Scene 13). Having Inseminated her, he
can if he chooses attempt to avoid all further contact with both her
and the resulting offspring. A single intercourse need have no
greater cost than that involved in fending off future claims for help
and support if she does have a child. Against what could be,
therefore, a relatively minor cost he can set the chance of producing
a child. If he does not take each opportunity to inseminate a new
woman as it arises, he may never get another chance. In which case,
whoever fathers her next child, it will not be him. A man's
reproductive success depends to a significant extent on his ability to
make the most Of one-off opportunities.
The situation is very different for a woman. For her, conception
is a major event. It may commit her at least to months of pregnancy
and usually to years of dedicated effort. The man
250 251SPERM WARS
concerned might desert her (Scenes 8 to 11, and 16). Moreover,
conceiving via a man later proved to be genetically inferior could
result in her raising a less successful child than if she had waited for
a more suitable man (Scene 18). Together, these two dangers mean
that an incautious, one-off intercourse can considerably reduce a
woman's reproductive success. Her priorities need to be when
(Scene 16) and with whom (Scene 18) she has one-off sex, rather
than how often. Caution and selectivity are of maximum
importance.
Of course, women are not always cautious. The primary situation
in which a woman might abandon caution, though not usually
selectivity, is when she has a one-off opportunity to collect sperm
from a particularly desirable man. Usually, this is a man who she has
already judged from a distance would make a good genetic father for
her next child (Scene 18). In this book, we have seen several women
behaving in this way (Scenes 6, 17, 19, 21 and 26). Most often, as in
those scenes, such behaviour is within the context of infidelity. Once
a woman has a long-term partner, the costs of one-off intercourse are
reduced as long as her infidelity remains undetected (Scenes 9 to
11). Her long-term relationship provides a springboard from which
to exploit the genetic benefits of one-off sex with selected men
without risking too much. She does not have this freedom, however,
if she does not have a partner.
The result of these pressures is that women, like all female birds
and mammals, are genetically programmed to be cautious and
selective. In past generations, women who were not so were less
successful reproductively than those who were. All women alive
today are the genetic descendants of the more cautious of female
ancestors, not their more reckless contemporaries. Men, on the other
hand, are genetically programmed to be urgent and single-minded
about one-off sex. In past generations, men who were not urgent and
persuasive were less successful reproductively than those who were.
All men alive today are the genetic descendants of the more urgent
of male ancestors, not their more complacent contemporaries.
252
LEARNING THE GROPES
We can see, then, that there is a big difference between men and
women in the potential costs and benefits of a one-off intercourse.
This difference automatically means that the two sexes approach any
potentially sexual situation with a conflict of interests.
A man can only satisfy his urgency if he can convince the
woman concerned that she actually wants to be inseminated by him,
now, rather than by him or somebody else, later. His
only alternative is to try to force insemination whether she wants it
or not. At first glance, it might seem that both of the boys in Scene
28 simply opted for the second course of action. Again, the situation
is not that simple. The complicating factor is that male persistence
in the face of female resistance can be a normal, mutually
acceptable facet of courtship and foreplay. So, too, can aggression
and a level of physical trauma. We are back to the way that women
set men tests as an aid to mate selection — which brings us to the
function of rough-and-tumble sex play.
This is an emotive issue — so emotive that it is probably best
broached by first considering the courtship of animals Other than
humans. For example, if we watch the courtship of dogs, we often
see a clumsy male persisting and persisting with his advances
despite rejection after rejection by the female. II we watch domestic
cats we see females clawing, scratching and spitting at prospective
suitors. If we watch mink, we see a male drawing blood as he tries
to subdue the female's spirited resistance.
Witnessing such behaviour, it is difficult not to feel sorry for the
females. At best they are being pestered, and at worst they are being
physically damaged by males who refuse to take no for an answer.
Yet, despite their resistance, female cats and dogs do eventually
allow one of their persistent and aggressive suitors to mate. As for
female mink, if they do not experience physical trauma at the male's
hands, they do not ovulate. Their bodies are on hold, waiting for the
right male to inseminate them before they produce an egg (Scene
15). In all of these
253SPERM WARS
animals, female resistance is actually a test of male competence.
Rough-and-tumble sex play in humans is similar.
On average, men who are physically able to overcome the final
defences of a female and achieve insemination leave more offspring
than those who are not. So women whose sons and grandsons also
have this ability will enjoy greater reproductive success. One of the
criteria (Scene 18) that a woman can add to her list when selecting a
mate, therefore, is his ability to overcome her physical resistance —
but how does she test such an ability?
Initially, she can simply watch him in competition with other
males. The young men in Scene 28 spent much of their time chasing
and wrestling with each other, doing their best to display their
strengths and hide their weaknesses. But finally, the only real test a
woman can set is whether a man can negotiate and overcome her
own defences. To test this, she has to resist first verbally, then
physically. The stronger and more realistic her resistance, the better
the test.
This is, of course, a dangerous game. Resist too little, and the test
is meaningless. Resist too much, and the male may inadvertently
cause real rather than superficial damage. The fact that courtship
rough-and-tumble aggression rarely results in serious damage in
cats, mink or even humans shows the accuracy with which this
feature of sexual behaviour has been moulded by natural selection.
Even in mink, the level of trauma that stimulates a female to ovulate
is set at a level just high enough to test the male's ability to
overcome her defences, but not high enough for her to suffer longterm damage.
In species such as humans which form long-term relationships,
rough-and-tumble sexual behaviour is most important during the
early stages of courtship. Once a woman has tested a man's ability to
force himself on her, she need not do it often thereafter. But as in all
such tests of male health and ability (Scene 20), even within a
relationship a woman gains from occasional reappraisal of her
partner.
Of course, in this as in most features of human sexuality,
LEARNING THE GROPES
people vary (Scenes 35 to 36). For some, rough-and-tumble sex play
is indeed a minor and infrequent element in their relationship. For
others it is an essential element even up to the level of
sadomasochism, if they are to accept the other person as a suitable
partner. The dark-haired couple in our scene clearly leaned in this
direction. Their intercourse on that first afternoon was rough, painful
and humiliating for the girl, yet through the experience she
recognised the boy as a compatible partner. In the years that
followed, their sex life was to continue in the same vein — even
once he was her long-term partner, she tested his ability to force her
on many occasions during routine sex.
We can now understand the decisions made by the two girls in the
scene in the days and weeks that followed the writs by the river. The
boy who forced the dark-haired girl Into intercourse passed her tests.
She was already attracted to him, as were most other women, and her
body perceived that his qualities made him seem a good candidate
for giving her reproductively successful sons and grandsons. These
qualities included physical power and sexual competence, qualities
that her own characteristics made her well suited to test.
In contrast, the other boy lost stature in his girlfriend's eyes at all
levels as the afternoon wore on. In part, he suffered by comparison.
Mainly, however, he failed in an absolute sense DO live up to his
girlfriend's criteria for acceptability. There wore probably two ways
he could have passed her tests, but he failed in both. The basic cause
of his double failure was inexperience. First, with more experience,
he would probably have opted for restraint and might eventually
have gained long-term benefits (as, for example, did the experienced
man in Scene 20 who, when faced with a similar situation, opted for
patience rather than force and six weeks later reaped the reproductive
benefits (Scene 26)). Instead, however, he opted for force. Even then,
with greater experience at intercourse he might still have cemented a
longer-term relationship and hence won many future opportunities
for insemination.
254 255SPERM WARS LEARNING THE GROPES
SCENE 29
How to Con
Outside the car, it was very dark and very cold. Inside, it was warm
and getting warmer. After pulling off the road among the trees, he
had left the engine running and the heater on while they climbed into
the back seat. Now everything was warming up nicely. The girl's
breasts were exposed, her knickers were around her knees and his
hand was between her legs in the warmest place in the car. She was
struggling with the front of his trousers, and he was very excited. As
he kissed and nibbled the side of her neck, his ear rubbed against the
car window, cold and wet with condensation.
Since acquiring his own car, six months ago, this was the third
time he had been in this position. But on the first two occasions,
each with a different girl, he had missed his chance.
The first time, he had naively assumed that any girl interested in
sex would be on the pill. She wasn't — and she wouldn't let him
have sex without a condom, which he didn't have anyway. He had
pleaded with her to let him in, promising he would withdraw before
he came. She said she had been promised that once before, would
never trust a boy again, then immediately lost interest and asked him
to drive her home.
The second time, he had simply been taken by surprise. Offering a
lift to a girl he scarcely knew, he had been amazed to find that before
they were even half-way home he was being seduced into finding a
quiet spot for them to enjoy themselves. They had been on the verge
of intercourse when she suddenly stopped and asked him to use a
condom. When he said he
didn't have one, she pushed him away. He offered to drive off and
buy some, but she too had lost interest and had wanted to go home.
With both girls, he had only the one opportunity for intercourse.
Neither had given him a second chance. He had vowed never to miss
another opportunity, and ever since his second experience had
carried a condom with him. Now, two months on, with the foil
around the condom looking faded and worn, here at last was his
chance to reap the benefits of his hard-earned lesson. If he failed this
time, it wouldn't be because he wasn't prepared — or so he thought.
The moment came, and without even being asked he fumbled for
the condom in his pocket. As he tore off the foil, the girl took off her
knickers and got herself into as comfortable a position as she could.
He pulled the condom out of the foil, perched it on the tip of his
penis, and tried to roll it on. But it wouldn't go. The condom just
wouldn't roll. He held it up in the blackness to try to work out which
way round it should go, but could see nothing. He turned it over and
tried again. He began to panic as he felt movement deep in his penis.
The girl asked if he was having trouble. It was fine now, he lied,
and with the unrolled condom still balanced precariously on the tip
of his penis he moved into position and entered her without help.
He knew the condom had come off as soon as he started thrusting,
but he had been waiting for this moment too long to 'lop now. With
supreme will-power he fought off the ejaculation that was so near as
he entered and revelled in the excitement of an unprotected
intercourse. Not until he went to withdraw, several minutes after
ejaculation, did he tell the girl the bad news, feigning surprise as he
pretended to search for the condom end with his fingers. The girl
swore and, in panic, tried to find the condom inside her. In the end,
with longer fingers and a better angle, it was he who found and
removed the still unrolled rubber. He apologised
256 257SPERM WARS LEARNING THE GROPES
profusely, admitted the possibility that he might not have put it on
properly, but suggested that perhaps they had just been too vigorous
in their love-making and she had pulled it off him.
As he drove her home, he tried to argue that there wasn't really any
danger. The condom would still have stopped him from shooting the
sperm into her womb and it did have a chemical on it that killed
sperm. Even if a condom came off, he argued, it still worked like a
cap. Being relatively naive herself, the girl believed him. In the days
that followed, he bought a supply of condoms and practised. At great
financial expense, he practised until he could don a condom in any
light, in any position, and with either hand.
He never accidentally lost a condom during intercourse again, but
did so deliberately on five further occasions, each time with a
different girl and each time after they had once previously had
intercourse with the condom properly in place. Each time, frustrated
by the reduced sensations of wearing the rubber, he rolled the
condom down such a short way that it came off almost immediately
he began to thrust.
None of these deliberate deceptions produced a baby. Four of the
girls did not ovulate after their 'accident'. The fifth did ovulate and
her egg was fertilised. However, the 'accident' with the condom and
the prospect of pregnancy and motherhood just before the most
important exams of her life stressed her so much that, when the
fertilised egg reached her womb, it passed straight through without
implantation. When her period began, she went out to celebrate.
Nevertheless, the young man's misuse of condoms did make him a
father, but through accident, not design. The mother of his child was
the girl with whom he had accidentally first discovered the condom's
potential for gaining unprotected intercourse. Naively reassured by
his story of the condom working like a cap, she had patiently waited
for seven weeks for a period that never came.
258
n Scenes 27 and 28 we have explored the way that young men
and women have to learn various techniques in order to make the
most of their sexual opportunities. In the modern world, they also
have to learn how to use contraception. The young man in the
current scene missed two opportunities for intercourse through his
general lack of experience with girls. He nearly missed a third
through his lack of experience with condoms.
When we discussed family planning in Scenes 16 and 17, we
concluded that modern contraceptives may have little impact on the
total number of children a woman has in her lifetime. Nevertheless,
they do supplement her natural methods of family planning, thereby
giving her even more control over when and with whom she
conceives. For a woman today, modern contraceptives are an
important aid in her pursuit of reproductive success. Not least, they
are a useful weapon in her manipulation of sperm warfare. In this
section, we discuss the ways in which a man may also use modern
methods of contraception to enhance his reproductive success.
The idea of hindering or killing sperm as they leave the penis is
not new. Over two thousand years ago, Pliny suggested rubbing
sticky cedar gum over the penis before intercourse. The sheath has
been known since Roman times and was in use in many parts of
Europe by 1700. Fallopio designed the first medicated linen sheath in
the 1500s, but the item took its name from the personal physician to
King Charles II, the Earl of Condom, who recommended its use to
the king as an aid to prevent the contraction of syphilis. By the
1890s, all of the barrier methods of contraception in use today were
openly on sale in the United Kingdom. However, their use is unlikely
to have been widespread until well into the twentieth century. In the
1980s, about 50 per cent of couples in countries such as
259
ISPERM WARS
Britain were relying on the man for their contraception. Only 30 per
cent were using condoms; the remaining 20 per cent were simply
using withdrawal.
The perhaps surprisingly high incidence of withdrawal as a means
of contraception during routine sex is in part a reflection of how men
feel about using condoms. As most women can testify, if a man is
expected to wear a condom during intercourse, he becomes much
more cavalier in his attitude towards contraception. Of course, when
asked why they don't like using condoms, men say that they simply
don't enjoy sex so much with them on — the 'Wellington boot'
syndrome. Women, on the other hand, tend to be much more
favourably disposed towards them. This difference between the sexes
in attitude towards condoms reflects a very important consequence of
their use — by preventing sperm from entering the vagina, condoms
negate a man's reproductive benefit from intercourse much more than
they negate a woman's.
This difference is less marked during routine sex than during
casual sex. When a man and a woman are in a long-term relationship,
the timing, spacing and number of children that are best for one
partner are usually also best for the other. Consequently, an untimely
conception would be equally disadvantageous for both of them
(Scene 16). Since the use of condoms is one way that both partners
can avoid conception, we might expect both the man and the woman
to be equally appreciative of their use. Even in a long-term
relationship, however, there is some difference between a man's and a
woman's liking for condoms. Why?
The main reason is that, as we have already discussed (Scene 2),
conception is not the main function of routine sex. Such sex is the
means by which a woman hides her fertile phase (Scene 2) while her
partner tries to keep her topped up with his sperm as a defence
against sperm warfare (Scenes 2, 4 and 6). Condoms do not spoil a
woman's subconscious rationale for having routine sex, but they do
spoil a man's. A woman can still hide her fertile phase via routine sex
whether a condom is used or not. Obviously, however, if the sperm a
man ejaculates do
LEARNING THE GROPES
not take up residence in the female's tract, they provide him with no
defence against sperm warfare.
It is not surprising, then, that even during routine sex men are
consciously and subconsciously less enthusiastic about the use of
condoms than women (Scene 17). Not least, men are much more
likely to advocate taking the occasional risk.
To understand why this difference in attitude is even more marked
during 'casual' sex, let us first consider the pressures on a woman
during casual sex and how these are affected by the use of a condom.
As we have already discussed (Scene 28), a woman is normally more
cautious and selective over casual sex than a man. All the same,
having decided on a suitable time, place and partner, she can still
gain a number of advantages from casual intercourse — as long as
she doesn't conceive (see Scenes 18, 20, 27 and 28). For example, if
she is without a long-term partner, intercourse can help her gain a
man's attention in her search for one. In addition, she can use the
intercourse to gauge a man's sexual competence, potency, and to
some extent health and fertility. Casual intercourse can thus be an
avenue to protection and financial or other help from a man who she
judges might be a suitable long-term partner. If she already has a
long-term partner, casual sex with somebody else can provide a
'reserve' — a man to move on to if her current relationship breaks up
(Scenes 16 and 19). None of these benefits from casual sex require
her to conceive. In fact, she retains more options if she does not
conceive. Only when she is specifically after a particular man's genes
(Scenes 6 and 26), or when she is trying to maneuver him into a longterm partnership by becoming pregnant (Scene 18), does she benefit
from conceiving as a result of casual intercourse. Except on these
occasions, therefore, a woman gains from the use of a condom during
casual sex. Condoms even help to reduce one of the potential costs of
casual sex, the risk of infection.
Of course, a man also benefits in this last respect. Otherwise,
though, the pressures on a man are quite different from those on a
woman. We discussed these pressures in detail in Scene 28 in
260 261SPERM WARS LEARNING THE GROPES
explaining why men are much more urgent, single-minded and
cavalier over casual sex than women. Briefly, intercourse with as
many women as possible is one of the main ways whereby a man can
enhance his reproductive success. Each child produced in this way is
a bonus to be added to that mainstay of his success — the children of
a long-term relationship. A man suffers very few costs from casual
sex that might erode this potential bonus. Harsh though it might
seem, all each conception needs to cost him is a few minutes of his
time, an ejaculate, and a slight risk of contracting a disease. If a
longer-term relationship with the mother is in his reproductive
interests, he may decide to offer paternal care. But if it is not, he may
simply leave her to raise the child (or not — Scene 16) as best she
can, while he pursues other sexual opportunities and seeks a more
promising long-term relationship.
The major problem a man encounters in trying to bolster his
reproductive success via casual sex is the difficulty of finding
enough women to cooperate with him. Few, if any, men get as many
opportunities for casual sex as they are programmed to seek-and
hence would like. When such opportunities do arise, they are
programmed to let as few pass by without insemination as possible
(Scene 28). Using a condom to remove all chance of conception thus
negates a man's fundamental reason for pursuing casual sex.
Subconsciously, his body realises the futility of casual sex with no
chance of conception — just as, again subconsciously, a woman's
body realises the power of casual sex with no chance of conception.
Yet, despite the apparent futility of their actions, men are sometimes
prepared to wear a condom on such occasions. Why?
One possibility is that a man's body is actually fooled by this
relatively recent invention into doing something that is against its
reproductive interests. It is programmed to assume that when he
ejaculates inside a woman the sperm will do their job. Perhaps,
despite the evidence from his conscious brain, his body refuses to
accept that a condom inevitably negates this assumption.
There is some evidence for this. Men still make all the same
topping-up (Scene 4) and warfare (Scene 6) adjustments to the
number of sperm they ejaculate during intercourse whether they are
wearing a condom or not. They probably ejaculate about 10 per cent
fewer sperm if they are wearing a condom, but the adjustments are
the same. This suggests that a man's body still 'thinks' his ejaculated
sperm may have a job to do — even if it is merely 'wishful thinking'
that on this occasion the condom may have accidentally come off or
burst.
Even if this were an error in the programming of the male body,
it would not be so surprising. Relatively few generations of men
have been exposed to the use of condoms. Consequently, the
generation game of natural selection (Scene 1) has had very little
time to re-program the male body appropriately. But even if we
found that men actually reduced their reproductive success through
their use of condoms, we should expect things to change over the
generations to come. Eventually, the human population should
become dominated by the descendants of men who used condoms
to enhance, not reduce, their reproductive success.
At first, it seems counter-intuitive that condoms could ever
enhance a man's reproductive success. Nevertheless, there are at
least three ways in which they might.
One way would be if a man could use condoms to trade
opportunities with a woman. He could offer to prevent conception
when they first have sex in exchange for the opportunity of
unprotected sex in the future (similar to the situation portrayed In
Scene 20). He could then use the protected occasions to convince the
woman that he really is a suitable mate. As a result, she might
consider risking unprotected sex with him at some time in the future.
Another way would be if the greater protection against infection
that condom use affords more than made up for any missed
opportunities to inseminate. Since the advent of AIDS, the power of
condoms to reduce the risk of disease has become widely known. It
is possible that a man who uses
262 263SPERM WARS
a condom strategically throughout his sexual life will on average
stay healthier and thus enjoy a greater reproductive success than a
man who does not.
The third way would be much more devious — to (mis)use the
condom to con women into being inseminated in a way that allows
some chance of fertilisation. If a hundred couples used condoms
properly for a whole year, no more than three of the women should
become pregnant. Yet, in practice up to twenty to thirty conceive.
This is nearly half the number (seventy-five) who conceive if they
use no modern form of contraception at all. The most likely
explanation for this relatively high failure rate is that condoms are
not used properly during routine sex. Whether the failures are true
accidents or whether the men concerned, like the young man in
Scene 29, deliberately use condoms carelessly is not known.
Whatever the explanation for failures during routine sex, the
failure rate will almost certainly be higher during casual sex. There
is little doubt that many men use condoms during casual sex in all
three of these ways. On several occasions, the young man in the
scene misused them to give himself a chance of fertilisation during
intercourse. On top of that, he used condoms to increase his number
of casual encounters. Through not having had a condom to hand, he
had missed two opportunities at intercourse, and never had another
chance to inseminate either of the two girls concerned. With a
condom in his pocket, though, he was able to take full advantage of
opportunities with six other girls. On one of these occasions, he
produced a child which the girl was probably going to be left to
raise as best she could. Quite possibly, he would not have had this
child or any of his other opportunities had he not offered to wear a
condom.
Maybe the young man in the scene is not so unusual. There is an
intriguing possibility that on average men are already using
condoms to enhance rather than reduce their reproductive success. If
so, their bodies' strategy is as follows. First, try to have unprotected
intercourse whenever possible. Secondly,
LEARNING THE GROPES
offer to use condoms, as a strategy to increase the number of
opportunities for intercourse. Thirdly, while wearing a condom,
continue to make all of the necessary topping-up (Scene 4) and
warfare (Scene 6) adjustments just in case the Condom bursts or
comes off. Finally, on occasion, deliberately ml\use condoms to
achieve 'sneaky' inseminations. Perhaps, through this strategy,
learned and instinctive dispositions have already combined to allow
the men who are prepared to use condoms to achieve a greater
reproductive success than men who are not.
Similar arguments can be advanced to explain withdrawal as a
male strategy. Of course, as far as casual sex is concerned the offer
of withdrawal gives a man far fewer opportunities for insemination
than the offer of a condom. As in Scene 29, a woman is far less
likely to accept the offer of the former than she is the latter. There
are two main reasons. First, withdrawal offers far less protection
against getting pregnant than a condom. Secondly, it provides less
protection against infection. As far as fertilisation is concerned,
once a man has succeeded in penetrating through offering to
withdraw, it is far easier for him to inseminate and fertilise than if
he uses a condom. This is illustrated by the fact that withdrawal as
a means of contraception has an even higher failure rate than the
condom. If our hundred couples used withdrawal for a year instead
of condoms, only seven would conceive if they used the method
properly. In practice, however, up to forty women would conceive.
In part, these failures happen because the few sperm that leak out of
the penis before the man withdraws are particularly fertile. Mainly,
they happen because men often fail to withdraw as promised.
Offering to withdraw rather than to use a condom provides a man
with fewer opportunities for intercourse, but a better chance of
fertilisation when those opportunities do arise. Quite possibly, the
relative success of the two ploys depends primarily on how
experienced is the woman. As the young man in the scene
discovered, once a woman has realised that she can be
264 265SPERM WARS
deceived by the promise of withdrawal, she is far less gullible. In
fact, most women are rarely deceived more than once, either by the
false promise of withdrawal or by a carelessly positioned condom.
When she has been conned once, she is likely thereafter to keep a
close eye on the whole operation.
Although, naturally, humans are the only animals to use condoms,
they are not the only animals to use withdrawal. Many apes and
monkeys are known to penetrate and thrust without ejaculation. To
what extent this behaviour is simply the male using his penis to
remove material from inside the female's vagina (Scene 21), and to
what extent it indicates a tacit agreement between the male and the
female not to inseminate — as in humans — is not known.
Whenever it is the latter, however, we can be certain that from time
to time female apes and monkeys are also conned by males, just like
their human counterparts.
CHAPTER TEN
One Way
or Another
Scene 30
Best of Both Worlds
The young teacher looked up from his marking as his two
daughters, aged six and seven, skipped over to kiss him goodnight,
herded from behind by his partner like two frisky lambs. One of the
girls wished him goodnight in her mother's native language, one in
his. Most of the time the household spoke his language but in
moments of tenderness or anger any one of them might slip into the
mother's tongue. When she returned from taking them to bed, he
abandoned his marking, witched on the television and sat next to her
on the settee. She put her legs over his knees and they sat, eyes on
the screen, idly stroking each other's hands and legs. He looked
sideways at her, stomach churning with a fear that had been with
him all day.
How could he tell her that their whole world might be on the verge
of collapse?
'I am Preggnent and its Yours,' the scribbled note had said,
thrust into his hand during the morning break. 'My dad says you
must giv us sum money or well tell on you.' The girl was fifteen and
only slightly more illiterate than most of her contemporaries at the
school. Precocious and from a tough family background she
nevertheless had the looks and bearing that would fire most
266 267SPERM WARS ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
men's fantasies — until she spoke. She had asked him for a lift one
hot summer's night after school. Foreign languages were his main
subject but he doubled as a Physical Education teacher. It was hot
that night and he hadn't bothered to change out of his shorts before
getting in his car to set off home.
He should have said no when she asked for a lift. He should have
told her to stop when she began to stroke his thigh as he drove. And
he should have told her to get out when she took off her knickers. But
he didn't. Instead he drove to waste ground by a disused warehouse, got
into the back seat, and allowed her to pull down his shorts and climb all
over him. Looking back, he remembered how expertly she had handled
his clothes and his genitals and doubted that she was a stranger to sex.
He also doubted that he was the father — assuming she really was
pregnant, of course. Maybe she had set up other men, other teachers,
then tried to blackmail them also. Maybe the threat was hollow and
nothing would happen if he ignored it. But maybe she and her father
were serious and he would have to either pay up or own up.
The fear gnawing at his stomach grew stronger. He wasn't yet
thirty and his finances were in a terrible state — still not recovered
from his years at college, his year abroad, and his year of teacher
training. He was still sending money abroad to support the child he
had fathered during his exchange year, just before meeting his
present partner. Although she had managed to get a part-time job
once their youngest daughter had started school, they were still in
debt. He wouldn't be able to pay a blackmail demand. His only
option, if the girl was serious, was to deny ever having had sex with
her and hope that nobody had seen them that evening.
In truth, it wasn't the note that really worried him. If it was merely
a case of his word against hers he would have little to worry about,
financially or legally. Nor was he unduly worried about how his
partner would react. Theirs was a free-and-easy relationship and she
had the sexually liberated attitude much more typical of her culture
than his. She knew of his child in her home country and, despite their
financial situation, had
never suggested he should not provide its mother with some support.
Though she didn't know the whole story, she knew he had not been
totally faithful to her. A combination of bad luck and imprudence
had led her to find out about the first of his three infidelities. But she
had forgiven him and within a month they were back to normality.
He suspected the same would happen again over this schoolgirl,
especially if he denied the whole thing completely.
No, his stomach was not churning from fear that his partner
would discover his past indiscretions with women and girls. It was
churning from fear that she would discover his philanderings with
men and boys. His panic was that in defending himself against the
girl's note, he might provoke people who knew the other half of his
very active sex life into talking. Even apart from the legal dangers,
which were serious, he doubted that his partner would stand by him
if she knew the whole story, despite her sexual awareness and
understanding.
His homosexual activity went back as far as he could remember.
He was about six years old the first time his uncle, his regular babysitter, climbed naked into his bed to cuddle him. The games they
played were 'their secret' which his mother 'wouldn't understand' and
which would make her 'very angry'. In any case, he enjoyed them.
He liked the smell and feel of his uncle's body, the way their genitals
reacted to each other's touch, and the way he could help his uncle
discharge. He was ten when he first experienced penetration and
twelve when he first penetrated his uncle.
His first homosexual experience with someone his own age was
with his cousin. They were both eleven when, playing in his bedroom
one day while his parents were out shopping, he had persuaded his
playmate that they should take off their clothes and wrestle. Within
minutes they both had erections and within the hour he was
educating his cousin in some of the techniques he had learned from
his uncle. By the time they were thirteen and both able to ejaculate
they were meeting at least once a week for mutual masturbation and
anal sex.
268 269SPERM WARS
He was still thirteen when he first had sex with a girl. A young
neighbour, the same age as himself, whom he had played with
throughout his childhood, had succumbed to his 'I'll show you what
I can do if you'll show me what you can do' routine. And he had a lot
to show her. The years of practice with his uncle and cousin had
given him a knowledge of the body and a sureness and confidence
of touch that most males do not acquire until twice his age. The
young girl came back, week after week, to have him stroke and
stimulate her, each time allowing him to go just that little bit further.
In the end, he was touching and caressing her naked body, anus and
genitals with his hands, mouth and penis at such length and so
exquisitely that her young body was having its first tingling
experiences of orgasm. Each week her climax was just that little bit
stronger, and each time they had the opportunity she wanted more of
the same. After three months he convinced her that she couldn't
have a baby from anal intercourse and that she would enjoy it, and
after several experiments, she did. Before the year was out, she had
asked him for vaginal intercourse as well and by the time he was
fourteen his sexual education was complete.
At college, four years later, he joined the gay scene, spending
many of his evenings in gay bars and clubs. For a year, he lived with
another man in a more or less monogamous relationship, though
both of them were occasionally unfaithful, mainly with other men
but from time to time with women also. There was never any
shortage of women around him, many of whom told him how much
better a lover he was than his straight contemporaries.
For his exchange year, he went abroad to study the foreign
language he intended to teach. The person in the flat next to his
happened to be a woman. They were lovers within days, even before
he had found the local gay community. And within three months she
had conceived — but not before he had been unfaithful to her with
the woman who was to become his long-term partner. Before the
end of the year, she too had conceived. Even while living with one
woman
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
and being unfaithful with another, he still managed from time to
time to slip away for casual homosexual sex without either woman
knowing. On balance, though, most of his sexual activity while
abroad was with women.
When he returned to college to begin his final year of study, he
renewed his activities in the gay community. He kept in touch with
both mothers of his children by letter, sending what little money he
could. After graduation, he moved to a new city to train as a
teacher. No sooner had he arrived than the woman who was now
his partner turned up on his doorstep with their five-month-old
daughter. She moved in with him and they had lived together ever
since. Occasionally, he still picked up a casual lover at a gay bar,
but his partner had never found out and as far as he knew she had
never suspected his bisexuality.
Six years ago, he had landed his job as a teacher in a rough and
depressed town with a high level of unemployment. He vowed to
himself that he would never do anything sexually that might
prejudice his career or make it more difficult for them to get out of
debt. And for three years he had managed to restrain himself. But
then, in successive years, he had succumbed to the charms of two
student teachers. The first, a young girl, his partner had detected.
The second, a young man, she did not. Both affairs lasted only a
month. Then, a year ago, he had responded to the tentative
advances of another male member of staff and had begun a longterm homosexual relationship, which was still continuing.
Under cover of playing squash, the two men had sex at least
weekly in the other man's flat. It was uncanny how similar his new
lover was in his moods, behaviour and responses to the girl he had
impregnated within a few months of arriving abroad. In addition to
sex with each other, the men would sometimes visit gay bars to
pick up other men or explore the streets and toilets for young male
prostitutes. For these diversions, they drove to the anonymity of the
nearest large city, about thirty minutes away.
The problem that was now haunting him began six months
270 271SPERM WARS ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
ago. With his male lover, he had visited the city to look for child
prostitutes. They had just picked up two boys when they chanced
across two thirteen-year-olds from their school who were soliciting.
It was difficult to know who was the most unnerved by the
encounter. His weekend was tense, as he worried about what might
happen. He relaxed a little when, back at school on the Monday, the
two boys approached him and said that they wouldn't tell if the
teachers didn't tell.
Such an alliance might have been stable if the other teacher
hadn't then begun inviting the boys to his flat and paying them for
sexual favours. One evening, when he called round on his lover, the
two boys were still there. The temptation of such a foursome was
too great for him, and he allowed himself to be recruited into their
games of sexual musical chairs. From then on, the four had met for
group sex more or less weekly. Sensing their increasing
ascendancy, the two boys had begun to ask for more and more
money. Just a week ago, they had asked an extortionate amount.
When he had refused to pay so much, they had begun to make
threats. Now, there was also the note from the girl and he was
scared, really scared.
As it turned out, his fear was justified. The girl wasn't lying and,
moreover, was determined to have the baby. When he refused to
pay her blackmail demand, her father sued him for maintenance. He
denied both paternity and ever having had sex with her, but was
legally forced into a test of paternity. The publicity surrounding the
case encouraged the two boys, now aged fourteen, to decide there
was money to be made from selling their story. They accused the
teacher and his lover of forcing them to take part in homosexual
orgies against their will.
The teacher had judged his partner correctly. She stood by him
during the early stages of the paternity case but left him when the
homosexual scandal broke, taking their two daughters back to her
own country. He never saw them again. Within a week of her
departure, the paternity test confirmed him as the father of the
schoolgirl's child. Following his arrest he was
tried and found guilty of having sexual intercourse with minors,
both male and female. He spent only a short time in jail, but II
WHS long enough for him to contract HIV from homosexual
activity with other inmates. Unemployed and penniless, he died of
AIDS just before his thirty-seventh birthday.
ost readers of this book will be exclusively heterosexual.
After a period of sexual exploration and mate selection
during late adolescence, they will reproduce within the context of
one or two successive long-term relationships. The men will have
sex over their lifetime with about a dozen women — and the
women with about eight men. On average, they will produce two
children and eventually four grandchildren.
A minority, though, will pursue their reproductive success in a
quite different way. A few will be bisexual, spending phases of
their life directing most if not all of their sexual attention towards
people of the same sex as themselves. Others will be very
promiscuous, having hundreds if not thousands of sexual partners
in their lifetime. Yet others, at the other end of the spectrum, will
only ever have sex with one person. And there will be some men
who will direct part of their sexual activity towards forcing women
they have never met before to have sex with them. Some of these
will band together in gangs before finding a woman to rape.
The conventional majority often find it difficult to understand
the minority who show these alternative strategies. Their Unusual
behaviour is often interpreted as an aberration. The sometimes
unpalatable truth of the matter is, however, that such minorities are
pursuing reproductive success just as vigorously and strategically
as the conventional majority. And we should not assume that just
because these alternatives strategies are uncommon they are
necessarily unsuccessful.
Each of the seven scenes in this chapter focuses on an area of
human sexuality in which people pursue an uncommon but often
successful reproductive strategy. In this first scene, we explore
272 273
MSPERM WARS ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
the way that male homosexual behaviour can be a successful
reproductive alternative to exclusive heterosexuality.
Any discussion of homosexuality is bedevilled by the ambiguity
of the words that are used. In the following pages, I shall use the
following conventions. A heterosexual is a man who only ever has
sex with women. An exclusive homosexual is a man who
throughout his entire life only ever has sex with other men. A
bisexual is a man who has sex with both men and women.
Homosexual behaviour, on the other hand, is the behaviour shown
towards other men — whether the man concerned is an exclusive
homosexual or a bisexual.
At first sight, homosexual behaviour might seem a strange way
to pursue reproductive success. It would seem particularly strange
if, like most people, we made the mistake of assuming that just
because a man is sexually attracted to other men, he is inevitably
less likely to reproduce. The evidence, in fact, indicates the
contrary. Far from being a pathway to a lower level of reproductive
success, homosexual inclination is very much a successful
reproductive alternative to heterosexuality.
Men who are attracted to other men do still reproduce — and on
the whole they reproduce very successfully. On average, every
person who reads this book will have had within the past five
generations — in other words, since about 1875 — a male ancestor
who practised homosexuality. This does not mean that we have all
inherited a predisposition for homosexual behaviour. Some will
have done, as we shall see, but only a minority. Nevertheless, it
does mean that none of us would be the person we are today if one
of our ancestors had not shown homosexual behaviour — and
reproduced.
Before we start to discuss just how homosexual behaviour can
aid a man in his pursuit of reproductive success, we must consider
four basic facts about male homosexuality that are not generally
known and that provide a most important perspective.
First, homosexual behaviour is not peculiar to humans. Adolescent birds and mammals often show such behaviour. Male
monkeys show the same range of homosexual behaviour as men,
from mutual caressing and masturbation to anal intercourse. There
are reports, for example, of a male monkey masturbating to
ejaculation while being penetrated anally by another male.
Secondly, as far as humans are concerned, homosexual behaviour
is shown by only a minority of men — at least in the largest and
most industrial societies. In Europe and the United States, for
example, only about 6 per cent of men experience any homosexual
contact during their lifetime, most often during Adolescence. For
two-thirds of those men, that contact is intimate and genital, often
involving anal intercourse.
Thirdly, in all birds and mammals, including men, the vast
majority of males who show homosexual behaviour are bisexual.
for example, male monkeys who have anal intercourse with oilier
males do not reduce their rate of intercourse with females. The
same is generally true for men. The vast majority (80 per cent) of
those who have sex with men also have sex with women. Many,
like the man in Scene 30, may have phases that are exclusively or
almost exclusively homosexual, but for fewer than 1 per cent of
men does this 'phase' last an entire lifetime.
Finally, there is now convincing evidence that homosexual
behaviour is inherited. Genetic inheritance is more often via the
mother than the father: for example, men with homosexual
inclinations are much more likely to have uncles and cousins with
similar inclinations on their mother's side than on their father's. In
the scene we have just witnessed, the man's uncle was more likely
to have been his mother's brother than his father's; his cousin was
more likely to have been the son of one his mother's brothers or
sisters than his father's.
A genetic basis to homosexual behaviour does not mean that the
circumstances encountered by boys during their childhood do not
also influence their behaviour. Boys genetically inclined towards
homosexual behaviour may not show that inclination in some
childhood situations but may do so in others. The man in the scene,
who almost certainly carried the genes
274 275SPERM WARS
for homosexual behaviour, might never have developed his
homosexual tendencies had it not been for his early relationship
with his uncle. The converse could also be true, though it should be
less common — boys without the genetic inclination may
nevertheless be seduced or forced into homosexual behaviour
during childhood. Modern evidence suggests that, more often than
not, exclusive homosexuals and bisexuals are born and not made.
This discovery provides an important clue for biologists in their
attempt to understand the evolution of homosexual behaviour. No
gene can persist in a population at the 6 per cent level unless on
average it imparts some reproductive advantage to the individual
concerned. Of course, a lifetime of exclusive homosexuality can
have no reproductive benefit — but bisexuality can. It seems most
likely that exclusive homosexuality is a genetic by-product of the
reproductively advantageous characteristic of bisexuality. If so,
homosexual behaviour joins the ranks of a number of other human
characteristics that are advantageous when a person has inherited a
few of the relevant genes, but disadvantageous if they have
inherited more.
The classic example of such a characteristic is sickle-cell
anaemia. In the tropics, a single level of the sickle-cell gene is
advantageous, endowing its possessor with increased resistance to
malaria compared to people without the gene. A double level of the
sickle-cell gene, however, condemns the possessor to an early death
and/or a lifetime of pain and suffering.
Of course, this comparison between the genetics of homosexual
behaviour and the genetics of sickle-cell anaemia should not be
misinterpreted: there is no implication here that the former, too, is a
disease. Rather, the anaemia is the best-studied example of a genetic
principle that could also be applied to the inheritance of
homosexual behaviour. We can think of bisexuals as having a small
number of the genes for homosexual behaviour, and exclusive
homosexuals as having a larger number — bisexuals have a
reproductive advantage relative to heterosexuals; exclusive
homosexuals never reproduce, and have a
276
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
reproductive disadvantage compared with both heterosexuals and
bisexuals.
So, how big is the advantage of bisexuality compared with a
lifetime of only ever having sex with women?
As far as children within long-term partnerships are concerned,
bisexual men have fewer children over their lifetime, but probably
have them earlier in life. The man in Scene 30 had two children
with his long-term partner, probably about average for the society in
which he lived. But he had them before he was twenty-three,
several years earlier than the average heterosexual. Such early
reproduction may not seem very advantageous, but it can be.
Biologists measure reproductive success not simply in terms of
number of children or grandchildren, but in terms of reproductive
rate. A person can have a higher reproductive rate than another
either by producing more children over a lifetime or by producing
the number of children but earlier. Although throughout most of this
book it has been adequate to discuss simply the pursuit of
reproductive success, it is crucial here to remember that when we
talk of reproductive success, we really mean productive rate.
It is difficult enough to compare the reproductive success of
different categories of men, such as bisexuals and heterosexuals,
even if we limit our comparison to long-term partnerships. The risk
of including children raised within those partnerships but fathered
by other men will always render such comparisons fragile. And our
attempt becomes impossible when we try to compare their further
success via short-term relationships with a number of women. Even
the women who produce the children may not always know who the
fathers are — so the men certainly won't. Yet it is precisely this
avenue to reproductive success that seems to be the most important
to bisexuals. The expectation is that such reproduction allows
bisexuals to achieve a greater reproductive success than
heterosexuals, but the evidence is Impossible to obtain.
Multiple partners, both male and female, are a feature of male
277SPERM WARS
bisexuality. Nearly a quarter of men who show homosexual
behaviour have more than ten male partners in a lifetime. For some
the figure can be in the hundreds. More importantly, though, the
more male partners a bisexual man has during his lifetime, the more
female partners he is also likely to have. Since, on average, a
bisexual man will inseminate more females over his lifetime than
will a heterosexual man, a bisexual man is more likely to have
children with different mothers.
The important question, of course, is whether the average
bisexual's success at attracting and seducing many different women
owes anything to his experiences with many different men. There
are probably three main ways why it might.
The first is that early learning with other boys gives the bisexual
a precocious sexual competence. Over 80 per cent of men who are
ever going to show homosexual behaviour have done so by the time
they are fifteen, and 98 per cent by the time they are twenty. Male
homosexuality is an activity that occurs most often during
adolescence or even childhood, whether with contemporaries or
with older men. To appreciate the difference in competence between
boys with homosexual experience and their heterosexual
contemporaries, compare, for example, the man in Scene 30 with
the man in Scene 27. The latter could scarcely manage intercourse,
even at nineteen, let alone cope with the subtleties of the female
orgasm. In contrast, even at thirteen the bisexual in Scene 30 could
seduce girls into intercourse. By nineteen, women were queuing for
his favours, and even in his mid-twenties his sexual aura made him
attractive to girls from the age of fifteen upwards. The result was
that, before his thirtieth birthday, he had fathered four children with
three different women — more than most men in his society manage
from a lifetime of heterosexuality.
The second way in which homosexual activity can aid
heterosexual success is by allowing practice with different personalities. Experience with multiple male partners of different
character types gives the bisexual an edge when interacting with
multiple female partners of different character types (Scene 36).
278
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
For example, the man in Scene 30 was aware of the similarity
between his final male lover and one of the women with whom he
had produced a child. Experience with one gave him experience at
handling a relationship with the other. In this case, he experienced
the woman before the man. When the reverse is true, experience
gained with a man of a particular character type can help the
bisexual to get the most out of a relationship with a woman of a
similar character type. The experience may help at all stages and
levels of that relationship — seduction, stimulation, social
interaction and even deception.
The final way in which homosexual activity can aid
heterosexual success is via infidelity from within a long-term
heterosexual relationship. Practice at being unfaithful to his female
partner with a man gives the bisexual experience at walking the
tightrope of infidelity with a woman. Although bisexual men
decrease their homosexual activity markedly as they leave
adolescence and begin relationships with women, their
homosexual inclination rarely disappears completely. A man with
a long-term female partner is as secretive about his homosexual
infidelity as he is about his heterosexual infidelity.
There is some advantage in practising infidelity with a man. The
long-term female partner of a bisexual is less successful at detecting
his homosexual infidelities than his heterosexual Infidelities (often
because she does not know he is bisexual). A woman who does not
know her partner's true sexuality is likely to assume that he is
heterosexual — because the majority of men are. Consequently, she
will usually feel less threatened by his relationships with other men
than by his relationships with women — the average man's
relationships with other men will be less likely to be sexual than his
relationships with women. Even on those occasions when her
partner's relationships with men are sexual, a woman has less to
lose, at least initially, than if he is unfaithful with a woman.
Although some of the costs of infidelity (Scenes 9 and 11), such as
risk of infection, still apply, most do not. For example, he will never
need to reduce his support for her In order to help maintain his
lover's child. He is probably
279SPERM WARS
also less likely to desert her to live with his lover if the latter is a
man.
So homosexual behaviour during adolescence and beyond can
give a man considerable reproductive advantages over his
heterosexual contemporaries. In which case, why is bisexuality not
more common?
The answer is relatively straightforward. There are costs to
bisexuality which can negate the benefits. The most important cost
of homosexual behaviour is a greater risk of disease. Even before
the advent of AIDS, homosexual behaviour brought with it an
increased risk of early death from sexually transmitted diseases,
such as syphilis. In effect, bisexuals are programmed by their genes
to pursue a lifestyle that trades the benefit of an earlier and perhaps
greater production of children (with more women) against the risk
of an early death.
Another cost is genetic — and here there is another parallel with
sickle-cell anaemia. Although people with a small number of the
genes may gain an immediate apparent advantage, as we have seen,
that advantage may not be as great as it seems. This is because,
compared with people without the genes at all, those with a small
number will produce descendants with a higher proportion of
individuals with a larger number. In other words, although
bisexuals produce more children and grandchildren at a faster rate
than heterosexuals, among those descendants there will be a few
exclusive homosexuals who in turn fail to reproduce at all.
Yet another cost arises because a proportion of the heterosexual
majority display homophobia — a prejudice against people who
show homosexual behaviour. Such prejudice is occasionally so
extreme and violent that any man suspected of homosexual
behaviour faces an increased risk of injury or even death. We
encountered a similar if less extreme prejudice in Scenes 12 and 13
in relation to masturbation. With masturbation, of course, such
prejudice is all bluff and hypocrisy — the intimidators being as
likely to masturbate as the intimidated. Inevitably, some
homophobes are also hypocrites, displaying
280
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
public homophobia while secretly behaving bisexually. On the
whole, though, most homophobes are part of the heterosexual
majority.
Whenever we encounter such common prejudice, it is usually
because the target is in some way a threat to the people showing the
prejudice. It is quite possible that homophobes, like bisexuals, are
themselves born not made — an inevitable evolutionary result of
the very success of bisexuality that we have just discussed. The
reproductive advantages enjoyed by bisexuals mean that they
should — for that reason alone — be regarded as a threat by the
surrounding heterosexuals. Unfortunately, the bisexual's role in the
spread of disease adds to this threat. So, just as we discussed for
masturbation (Scene 13), one defence for the surrounding
individuals is to try to reduce the bisexuals' reproductive advantages
through threat and intimidation.
The final picture, therefore, is that compared with their
heterosexual contemporaries, bisexuals experience both advantages
and disadvantages in their pursuit of reproductive success. In which
case, the important question becomes whether the total costs are
greater than the total benefits, or vice versa. Are bisexuals more
successful reproductively than heterosexuals — or are they less
successful? The answer is that it depends on how common bisexuals
are in the population. When they are rare, they are more successful
than heterosexuals. When they are common, they are less
successful. The reasons are as follows.
The advantage of bisexuality lies in its exponents potentially
having a higher rate of reproduction than the average for the society
in which they live. As we have noted, earlier and better learning of
sexual technique gives bisexuals a competitive advantage over other
men in gaining sexual access to women. The more bisexuals there
are in the population, however, the greater the chance that their
competitors are also bisexual — and the more common bisexuals
become, the less the advantage enjoyed by any one individual as a
result of his bisexuality. As the proportion of bisexuals in the
population increases,
281SPERM WARS
not only does the advantage of bisexuality decrease, but the costs
increase. Of the three costs discussed above, two — genetics and
disease — clearly increase as bisexuality becomes more common.
As far as the genetic risk is concerned, the more common the
genes for homosexual behaviour the greater the chance that any
two people will carry those genes, and thus the greater the chance
that a man and his partner will produce sons and grandsons who
are exclusively homosexual and will therefore fail to reproduce at
all. When it comes to the risk of disease, the greater the level of
homosexual activity in the population, the faster the spread of
disease. More people, both heterosexuals and bisexuals, will
become infected. But because bisexuals are always at greater risk
of contracting disease, they will suffer most. Thus, the chances that
any given bisexual will have an early death are greater.
We have seen that, in a population in which bisexuals are rare,
those who are bisexual enjoy considerable advantages over
heterosexuals. The result is that the genes for bisexuality increase
in proportion in the population. Conversely, as bisexual behaviour
becomes more common, the advantage enjoyed by bisexual
individuals decreases and the costs increase. If the behaviour
becomes too common, the reproductive rate of bisexuals falls
below that of heterosexuals, and the proportion of bisexuals in the
population begins to decrease once more.
The inevitable result of this interplay of costs and benefits as the
proportion of bisexuals rises and falls is that eventually the
proportion of bisexuals stabilises. Moreover, it stabilises at
precisely the level at which the average success of bisexual
behaviour in each generation is just the same as the average
success of heterosexual behaviour. Therefore, the answer to our
question — who does better reproductively, bisexuals or
heterosexuals? — is 'neither'. The only difference between the two
is that the reproductive success of bisexuals is more precarious —
they have a much greater chance of not reproducing at all.
However, if they successfully avoid being
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
killed by homophobes and contracting HIV, they also have the
potential to be very successful. On average, the greater risks and
the greater potential just balance each other.
The conclusion, therefore, is that in the larger, more industrial
societies the genes for bisexuality have stabilised at around 6 per
cent of the population because this is the level at which bisexual
and heterosexual men, on average, do equally well.
The situation would be very different, of course, if the costs of
bisexuality were never as great as the benefits, no matter how
common the bisexual genes became in the population. Suppose,
for example, there were some societies in which there was very
little risk of sexually transmitted disease. In such societies, the
benefits of bisexuality could always outweigh the costs, no matter
how many people used the strategy. We should expect the genes
for bisexuality to sweep through the whole population. Is it
conceivable that there have ever been societies in which there
were sufficiently few costs to bisexuality? The answer is yes.
So far in this discussion, we have concentrated on large
industrialised societies — which are uniquely unfavourable for the
wholesale spread and persistence of bisexuality. In particular, they
harbour and facilitate the spread of those sexually transmitted
diseases which generate the main costs of the strategy. The recent
emergence and spread of HIV and AIDS are merely the most
recent examples of a sequence of events that will have occurred
many times throughout human history. For example, from the
Middle Ages until the twentieth century syphilis was the major
sexually transmitted killer in the larger societies.
Historically, small, more isolated communities have harboured
relatively few diseases. Since the members of such communities
were the offspring of the survivors of past epidemics, they
inherited their ancestors' natural, perhaps genetic, Immunity. New
diseases rarely appeared because the people had little contact with
the outside world. When they did have such contact, few escaped
exposure to disease no matter what
282 283SPERM WARS
their behaviour. The survivors were again those with some form of
immunity — which they passed on to their offspring. Consequently,
before they encountered the outside world and were exposed to
measles, smallpox, syphilis and now AIDS, such small isolated
societies enjoyed long periods with little danger from disease. In
such circumstances, bisexuality would have carried nowhere near
the risks that it now does in larger societies, with the result that the
genes for bisexuality should have spread unchecked by disease. No
matter how common bisexuality became, its exponents would still
have reproduced faster than heterosexuals. It should be no surprise,
therefore, to find that many such communities when first
encountered and studied contained a far higher proportion of
bisexuals than the industrialised world. And it should be no
surprise, either, to find that, when the majority of people are
bisexual, homophobia either becomes much less common or
disappears completely.
As far as the level and tolerance of bisexuality are concerned, it
is the major industrialised societies that are the exception, not the
rule. Anthropologically, in 60 per cent of human societies
bisexuality is both common and socially accepted. Some societies,
such as certain small island communities in Melanesia, accept as
normal that all adolescent males will at some point engage in
homosexual anal intercourse. The women also accept that their
long-term partner will from time to time have sex with other men,
and they tolerate their partner's homosexual infidelity more than his
heterosexual infidelity. The usual attitude is that their partners can
continue with their homosexual activity as long as it does not
interfere with their heterosexual relationship. But even in these
societies, where all male adolescents have phases of homosexuality,
sometimes within short-term 'monogamous' relationships, exclusive
homosexuality over an entire lifetime is very rare. Homosexual
behaviour is very clearly part of a bisexual reproductive strategy.
Moreover, it is so successful a strategy that it has completely
displaced the heterosexuality that is the norm in larger, more
disease-prone societies.
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
SCENE 31
The Coming of Women
The girl rubbed the steam off the bathroom mirror so that she could
examine her face yet again. Reassuring herself for the fourth time
that evening that the spot on her chin had almost gone, she carried
on towelling herself dry. Twenty years old and she was still getting
spots — surely she must grow out of them soon? As she hung the
towel over the radiator, she noticed the nearly empty packet of
tampons on the shelf and smiled. Which one of them would make
the supreme effort and put it back in the cabinet this month? It was
a week since their periods had finished — strange how they tended
to coincide — and neither of them had yet managed to put the
packet away. Powdering herself, she felt her throat tightening.
Even after a year together she still got excited at the prospect of sex
with her partner. She had been looking forward to this all day and
there was a tingle between her legs already.
As she walked naked from the steamy bathroom to the dry heat
of the bedroom, her partner was already lying on the bed. Ten years
older than herself and the mother of a young child, she still had a
wonderful body. How much better it was to lie down next to a soft,
smooth, yielding and compliant woman than a muscular, urgent
and selfish man.
Immediately she was on the bed, they embraced and kissed. As
they did so, their hands slid expertly over each other's bodies,
lightly stroking here, lightly caressing there. From time to time one
would massage the other's breasts, play with a nipple, or gently
stroke pubic hair. Taking it in turns, they moved down each other's
bodies, kissing and licking as they went, each doing to the other
what she most wanted to be done to herself.
284 285SPERM WARS
After a while, the girl sat astride her partner, facing away from
her, then bent forward to lick her thighs and genitals. As she did
so, she raised her bottom in the air, presenting herself to her
partner's tongue. This was the bit she liked best. Whenever she felt
like an orgasm, this never failed to take her to the brink. As the
warm, wet tongue licked and probed her vaginal lips, then so
gently massaged her clitoris, she felt the sensations she had been
anticipating all day. They kept each other on a high for minutes as
they neared the edge but never crossed. Exquisite though they
both found oral sex, they rarely climaxed from that alone.
Finally, unable to wait for release any longer, she lay back
alongside her partner. Her momentary loss of focus soon passed as
they kissed deeply, each briefly tasting their own juices on the
other's tongue. As they kissed, their fingers stroked and probed
each other's wet vaginal lips, then massaged each other's clitoris.
Each knew exactly what to do. As the girl felt the flush spread
over her chest, throat and face she saw the same happening to her
lover. Their breathing became a gasping, their pulses raced, and
the sounds in their throats became louder and more urgent. For
one brief, wonderful moment they hovered on the brink, then
climaxed more or less simultaneously. It had easily lived up to the
day's anticipation. They settled into their usual post-orgasmic
embrace, hands now idly stroking each other's body. In the
seconds before drifting off to sleep, she thought how much more
expert they had become at giving each other orgasms since they
first started living together.
Normally, they slept for only fifteen minutes or so after sex,
but when she woke nearly an hour had passed. Her partner was
still asleep and it seemed cruel to wake her. Nevertheless, she was
beginning to fret. She had only an hour to get dressed and cross
town. Eventually, she could delay no longer and made to move
off the bed. Immediately, her lover woke and sleepily urged her to
stay a little longer, suggesting it wouldn't matter if she was a bit
late for her meeting. Sliding off the bed and going in search of
clothes, the girl said she wished
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
she could stay but really did not want to be late for the third week
in a row.
As she went into the bathroom, her partner shouted after her,
complaining that she always seemed to be out in the evenings these
days. She reminded her that in the beginning they were never out
of each other's company. That had been a year ago, the girl shouted
in reply. Coming back into the room, she reassured her companion
that once her exams were over, they could return to how they had
been. In the meantime, she couldn't afford to miss anything.
Before she left, her lover made her promise she wouldn't be
late.. Saying that she would do her best, but warning that she
would probably be dragged off for a drink once the meeting was
over, the girl left.
Once alone, the woman got up, still naked, and switched on ionic
music. Idly, she walked round the room. A moment of fear struck
her when she saw the letter on the shelf, reminding her to have a
repeat cervical smear tomorrow — abnormal cells, was that
serious? In an attempt at self-distraction, she picked up the framed
photograph of herself and the girl on holiday the previous summer,
both tanned, drunk and happy. Not far away on the shelf was a
photograph of herself with her young son. He was now ten years
old, but it was several months since she had seen him. Once she had
begun living openly with her current lover, his father had refused
her access, insisting on looking after the boy himself with his new
partner. If only he knew, she thought, that the boy almost certainly
wasn't his but, most likely, the product of a wild evening she had
spent in a hotel room with two men and a girl while he had been
away. Memories of that evening triggered the familiar tingle
between her legs. It was only an hour since her last climax, but the
minute she felt that sensation she knew she would masturbate
before the evening was over.
The girl got off the bus and walked into the restaurant. She was
late. She had known it would be a mistake to try to fit in sex before
leaving but had been desperate for an orgasm all day.
286
287SPERM WARS
Looking around the tables, she wondered if he would still be
there. This was their first real date, though he had been pushing
her for some time. She didn't really want to deceive her partner,
especially now. The latter's problems over access to her son and
the worry of her abnormal cervical smear results were putting
them both under considerable strain. Somehow, though, she didn't
feel quite as guilty about a clandestine meeting with a man as she
would with another woman.
It was over a year since she had had sex with a man. In fact,
her current lesbian relationship had been so rewarding that she
had begun to think she would never feel like sex with a man
again. She had always known she was bisexual, ever since she
was a child. Throughout childhood and adolescence she had
persuaded girlfriend after girlfriend to take off their clothes and
get into bed with her. Once in her mid-teens, however, she had
also given in to the occasional male.
At first she had just been curious about heterosexual sex, but
after a few experiences had actually begun to enjoy it, in its own
way. More than anything, though, she had enjoyed the feeling of
power she could have over boys. Compared with her girlfriends,
first the boys and later the men had seemed so gullible, so easy to
manipulate and deceive, that she had found it difficult to respect
them. Also, men were so sexually inept; so selfish. As long as she
was in the mood, she could virtually guarantee that another
woman could give her an orgasm. With a man, she nearly always
had to apply the final touches herself, if she felt like it. So what
was she doing in this restaurant, clandestinely meeting a man?
She really didn't know, except that perhaps she was ready for
another experience — and this man really was rather attractive. A
hand waved from the corner table. She waved back and went to
join the hand's owner.
On the other side of town, while the pair in the restaurant ate,
the girl's lover was lying naked on the bed, bringing herself to a
climax. Afterwards, she went into the sitting-room to relax with a
bottle of wine, music and a book. But she couldn't settle. There
had been something strange about her lover's manner
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
for the past day or so and it was bothering her. Suddenly, she
began to look up the telephone number of the bar where the girl
and her friends usually went after their lectures and meetings. She
phoned, asking to speak to her, intending to suggest that she came
and joined them. It wouldn't be the first time. She was told,
however, that neither the girl nor her friends were there. Deciding
they must have gone elsewhere, she tried to If settle down to her
book once more.
There was an inquisition when the girl eventually returned —
late, but not unduly so. The story she gave was that after their
meeting her friends had decided they should all try somewhere
new. Eventually, she convinced her partner she was telling the
truth, but there was still an atmosphere between them when they
went to bed.
In fact, the girl and her male escort had not had sex that
evening, but it was only a week before they did. Afterwards, as
the weeks passed, their relationship developed in a way that she
had only thought possible with a woman. Her infidelity to her
lesbian partner became increasingly difficult to hide as she found
herself wanting to spend more and more time with her lover. Her
ingenuity was stretched to the limit. She also began to feel guilty at
what more in the way of trouble she might be giving to a woman
whose life was becoming increasingly fraught in every way. Her
repeat smear again indicated abnormal cells — and she began the
stressful process of having further tests and waiting for results. As
if that wasn't bad enough, she continued to be denied access to her
son and was passed over for promotion at work when the rumour
that she was a lesbian, which had been in the air for a while,
began to spread. The woman had begun to suspect that her young
lover was unfaithful to her, and increasingly they began to argue.
Their worst fight was sparked off when they accused each other
of faking orgasms. But she still couldn't be certain about her
partner's infidelity — right up to the moment, that is, that the
latter broke the news of her pregnancy. At first, she tried to
convince her that they could look after the baby together, but
288 289SPERM WARS
the girl was adamant about moving out and living with the baby's
father.
For a time, the woman was ill with stress and loneliness. After
losing her job, she began to feel suicidal. But then, in! the depths
of depression, she met a man who had just been) deserted by his
partner and family. They counselled each other out of their joint
despair and within weeks were living together. A year later, she
had his child — a daughter. Not long afterwards she was operated
on successfully for cervical cancer, and from then on her life
improved.
Once her son became independent of his father, he came to see
her. Untainted by his father's homophobia, he quickly grew close
to his mother and his younger half-sister and they became very
much a family. Although the woman died relatively young, in her
sixties, it was not before she had enjoyed fifteen contented years as
a doting grandmother.
aving discussed the way that homosexual behaviour can
aid men in their pursuit of reproductive success (Scene
30), it is relatively straightforward to do the same here for
women. This is because there are many similarities between male
and female bisexuality and relatively few differences.
Even those differences that do exist are largely just a matter of
degree. For example, on average across societies there are fewer
bisexual females than males — a trend that is also shown in most
animals. In any given human society, there tend to be about a
third to half as many women bisexuals as men. In large industrial
societies, in which only about 6 per cent of men show
homosexual behaviour, about 2-3 per cent of women do so. In
societies in which all men show homosexual behaviour, about 30-
50 per cent of women do so. This difference means that on
average we should each need to go slightly further back in our
family tree to find a female bisexual than to find a male. But the
difference is only about one generation — back to about 1850
instead of 1875.
290
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
Not only are there fewer female bisexuals than male, but on
average they begin their homosexual (lesbian) activities a little
later in life. Only 50 per cent of bisexual women have had their
first homosexual experience by the age of twenty-five, and only
77 per cent by the age of thirty. Some do not have their first
lesbian experience until they are in their forties.
Another difference between male and female bisexuals is that
bisexual women do not have as many homosexual partners as
bisexual men. Only 4 per cent of bisexual women have more than
ten homosexual partners in their lifetime compared with 22 per
cent of bisexual men. Similarly, women are more likely to have
longer-lasting 'monogamous' relationships with each other than
are men. A common pattern, shown by the girl in the scene, is for
a woman to stay in a homosexual relationship for one to three
years before moving on to a heterosexual relationship. Also as in
the scene, older women often 'fit in' a stable homo-sexual
relationship between successive heterosexual ones.
Compared with these minor differences between male and
female homosexual behaviour, there are many important
similarities. For example, most women who show homosexual
behaviour are bisexual. Fewer than 1 per cent of women in any
society are exclusively homosexual throughout their lifetime.
Over 80 per cent who show lesbian behaviour also show
heterosexual behaviour, as did both women in Scene II. All
human societies contain bisexual women; moreover, female
bisexuality is genetic and inheritable. And, like all of the
characteristics we have discussed, female bisexuality is
widespread among different species of mammals, birds and
reptiles. In fact, there is one species of lizard which consists only
of females. These will not develop eggs unless they are first
mounted in a pseudo-copulatory act by another female. They take
it in turns to mount each other and to stimulate each other's egg
production.
The many similarities and few differences between male and
female bisexuality are significant enough to justify a similar
Interpretation of the two types of behaviour. When we compare
291
HSPERM WARS ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
the reproductive success of female bisexuals and heterosexuals,
we reach precisely the same conclusion as we did for men (Scene
30) — as a strategy for the pursuit of reproductive success, female
bisexuality is a real and successful alternative to heterosexuality.
Briefly, bisexual women reproduce earlier than heterosexuals
but are also more at risk to disease and an early curtailment of
their reproductive life. Just as for men, the net advantage of
bisexuality tends to be greatest when the behaviour is rare. The
proportion of women in any given population who are bisexual,
therefore, should reflect the level at which the costs and benefits
just balance each other.
In many ways, we know more about the costs and benefits of
female bisexuality. This is because it is much easier to know how
many children a woman has had at different stages in her life than
it is a man — especially a man who has had many different
partners. For example, we know that by the age of twenty a
bisexual woman is four times more likely than a heterosexual to
have a child, and that even by the age of twenty-five she is still
twice as likely. The woman in Scene 31 had had one child by the
time she was twenty and two by the age of thirty-one. By the end
of their reproductive lives, however, bisexual women tend to have
fewer children than heterosexual. In Britain in the 1980s, for
example, one survey gave the average figures to be 1.6 children
for bisexuals and 2.2 for heterosexuals. The trends for earlier but
fewer children for bisexuals just cancel out, giving them the same
overall rate of reproduction as heterosexuals.
As briefly mentioned above, part of the reason that bisexuals
often end up with fewer children despite an earlier start than
heterosexuals is that, like the woman in the scene, their reproductive life can be curtailed through disease. Just like male
bisexuals, females are at greater risk of contracting sexually
transmitted diseases. By the age of twenty, they are more likely to
have experienced genital infections. By the age of twenty-five
they are more likely to exhibit abnormal cells in cervical smear
tests, and by thirty they are more likely to have cervical cancer.
To what extent this increased risk of disease is a direct result of
bisexual activity is not known. Sexually transmitted diseases,
such as herpes and genital warts, can be passed directly from
woman to woman during love-making. But there are other aspects
of female bisexuality which could also increase the risk of
infection, as we shall soon see.
The fact that female bisexuality is less common than male
suggests to an evolutionary biologist either that women have less
to gain from bisexuality than men or that they have more to lose
— or both. However, it is unlikely that bisexual women have
more to lose - quite the opposite, in fact. For example, not only do
male bisexuals seem much more likely to be at risk to disease,
they are much more at risk to violence from homophobes than are
female bisexuals. This is probably because lesbians are much less
of a reproductive threat to heterosexual women than are gays to
heterosexual men.
The conclusion, therefore, is that if women do not have more to
lose from bisexuality than men, they must have less to gain — and
this should not be so surprising. We have already seen that males
have a lot more to learn about sexual technique during early
adolescence than females (Scenes 27 to 30). Homosexual
experience at the appropriate time can confer precocious sexual
competence on both sexes, but does so much more clearly on
males. In fact, given that females have fewer basic sexual
techniques to learn than males during adolescence (Scene 27), we
have to ask what it is about sexual experience with other women
that gives bisexuals such an early advantage over heterosexuals.
The main things that a woman has to learn about sex are those
techniques that allow her to get the most out of long-term
relationships (Scene 18). In particular she needs to learn the
techniques of infidelity and deception. She also needs to learn how
to make the most of her orgasms in a way that will give her the
greatest control over sperm retention and warfare (Scene 26).
The elements of deception needed to exploit infidelity are
292 293SPERM WARS
probably better practised with another woman than with a man.
Moreover, they are best practised within the context of a
relatively long-term monogamous relationship with a woman —
which is one of the key features of female homosexual behaviour.
If a woman can fool a long-term female partner over infidelity,
faked orgasms and the like, then she should find it relatively easy
to fool a similar male partner. This allows her to exploit the
advantages of infidelity and sperm warfare (Scenes 21 and 26)
while reducing the risk of having to pay the costs (Scenes 9 and
11).
If bisexual women learn earlier and better how to exploit
relationships and how to promote and influence sperm warfare, it
should not be surprising to find that they make earlier and greater
use of these abilities. Bisexual women are inseminated just as
many times over their lifetime by a man as are heterosexual
women. Moreover, bisexual women are more likely to have more
than one concurrent male partner, and to have sex with two
different men in a short enough period of time to promote sperm
warfare.
Not only do bisexual women promote sperm warfare more
often, they seem better able (though the finer details have not
been measured) to control sperm retention and thus the outcome
of that warfare. They are more likely to masturbate, and to
masturbate more often, than heterosexual women. They thus
create stronger cervical filters (Scene 22). When they do have sex
with a man, bisexuals are no more nor less likely to have an
orgasm. But they are more likely to have a bypass orgasm (Scene
25), negating the effect of their cervical filter.
Because many of the orgasm responses that are a woman's
greatest weapon in sperm warfare actually occur in the absence of
men anyway (masturbatory; nocturnal — Scenes 22 to 26), they
can easily be practised in the context of a lesbian relationship —
including even those orgasms that in a heterosexual relationship
normally occur before, during or after penetration. This is
because the stimuli women give each other during lesbian sex are
very similar to those given by a man during foreplay. The
294
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
most common technique used by lesbians is the stroking and
managing of the genitals, particularly the clitoris. After that, in
decreasing order of frequency, come the stroking and massaging of
the breasts, the licking and sucking of nipples, oral sex, and the
pressing and rubbing together of the genitals. In societies such as
some in Melanesia, lesbians only ever use their mouths and hands
during sex. Elsewhere, objects are sometimes used, either to
stimulate the clitoris or to insert in the vagina. These range from
reindeer calf muscle in parts of Siberia to bananas, sweet potatoes,
and elegant carved wooden phalluses in other parts of the world. In
the more industrialised societies, of course, commercially
available vibrators and dildoes are sometimes used. However,
penetration either by fingers or objects is still a relatively
infrequent part of lesbian stimulation. In one American survey,
only 3 per cent of lesbians said that they regularly used penetration
to stimulate their partner during sex.
The orgasm 'success rate' is about twice as great if a woman is
stimulated by another woman rather than by a man. Moreover, the
orgasms women give each other are much more likely to occur
during the fertile phase of their cycle. The peak of sexual activity
that we witnessed right at the beginning of Scene 31 took place a
week after the women had finished their periods. If they were
going to ovulate that month (and they might not —Scene15) it
would be within the next few days. They were both in their fertile
phase.
Interestingly, this peak of orgasm frequency during the fertile
phase of a lesbian's menstrual cycle is mirrored by peaks of
homosexual activity by other female animals at a similar phase of
their cycle. Whether we study cows, rats or guinea-pigs, we find
that females are much more likely to mount each other during their
fertile phase. It has been shown experimentally that such mounting
behaviour is hormone-linked, so that changing the hormone
balance during menstrual cycle alters the timing of mounting, and
can even stop it altogether. Lesbians who take oral contraceptives
lose their peak of mid-cycle orgasm activity. This suggests that,
like
295SPERM WARS
the other animals described above, a lesbian's motivation to have
orgasms with her partner is also under hormonal rather than
cerebral control.
Our final picture of the homosexual behaviour of women, then,
shows a process of practising with women for success at getting
the most out of longer-term relationships with individual men.
This is not really any different from our conclusion for the
advantage of bisexuality to men. Bisexual men, however, are
practising primarily for success with many women. Unlike a man,
a woman cannot increase her reproductive success simply by
having more sex with more men. She does so, instead, by being
much more selective and strategic and by thus making the most of
exploiting the men around her. In this, a bisexual woman is aided
by a precocious ability to promote and manipulate sperm warfare
and by a longer-term ability to make better use of infidelity. Just
as for male bisexuals, however, the reproductive strategy of
female bisexuals brings with it increased risks that can result in an
early curtailment of their reproductive activity through disease or
early death. The net result, therefore, is that female bisexuals and
heterosexuals have similar reproductive success — but achieve it
by different means.
There is one last feature of interest in Scene 31 that we have
not yet discussed. When women live together, they often
synchronise their periods. Not only lesbians, but mothers and
daughters, nuns, prisoners, nurses and students also often
synchronise when they live together. In a fascinating series of
experiments carried out in the USA in the early 1980s, each
woman in a group of volunteers agreed to have the underarm
secretions from another woman rubbed under her nose every
other day for a few months. Each woman who received the
secretion adjusted her menstrual cycle to synchronise with that
of the woman who had provided it — which implies that
chemicals are present in a woman's underarm secretions which
enable groups who spend a lot of time together to synchronise
their menstrual cycles.
In recent years, there has been a lot of discussion over
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
whether menstrual synchrony is a real phenomenon. The most
recent research suggests that it is — but that so too is
desynchrony. In some groups of women, the menstrual cycles
become more similar, in others, more different. Which direction is
taken by any particular group is not due to chance, but depends
more than anything on how many of the women in the group are
ovulating regularly (Scene 15). Groups in which few are
ovulating, particularly if some are on the pill, lend to synchronise.
Groups in which most are ovulating tend to desynchronise. It is as
if the women's bodies are trying to ovulate as many days apart
from each other as possible.
Just why these responses should exist is still a mystery, but It
probably has something to do with hiding the fertile phase from
men (Scene 2). If a group of women all ovulated at the same time,
even the most unaware of males might notice the behavioural
changes associated with the fertile phase (Scenes 1, 6, 10 and 22).
In isolation, an individual can more easily hide these changes
from her partner amidst random swings in mood and behaviour.
The fact that the two women in Scene 31 were synchronised
suggests that they had not ovulated in recent months. This is a
common response to the absence of men (Scene 15). With the
beginning of the younger girl's heterosexual activity, we should
expect her first to ovulate, then to desynchronise her cycle from
her female lover.
296 297SPERM WARS ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
SCENE 32
The Tenth Tonight
The doorbell rang. It was uncanny the way she could tell
something about the person at the door just from the way he rang
the bell. The previous ring had been aggressive and persistent, but
this one had a tentativeness about it. She got up off the bed and
pulled on her bath robe over her underwear. Young, she thought
to herself — or a vicar.
On her way down the stairs, she did some quick mental
arithmetic. It had been a busy night. This would be the tenth —
maybe she should also make it the last.
When she saw him standing there, she smiled to herself — he
was young, not a vicar. And he looked distinctly uncomfortable.
Diffidently, he asked her how much. She told him, then pointed
out that it was more if he didn't want to use a condom. Taken
aback partly by the price and partly by her appearance, he
hesitated, then agreed. She stood back to let him in, told him to go
on up, and closed the door. Before following him, she took her
'Model - first floor' notice out of the window.
Once in the room, she asked him which it was to be, condom
or no condom. He said it would have to be with a condom
because he didn't have enough money to pay for it without.
'Money first,' she told him.
The youth looked very nervous. To settle him she told him her
name, or rather a name, and asked for his. He told her his family
name. Despite herself, she laughed. She asked him if he was in
the army. Embarrassed, he explained he was a student, that he had
only just left school and couldn't get out of the habit of giving his
family name when asked. She told him to relax, then asked if it
was his first time. When he said it
298
she asked if it was his first time ever or just the first time he'd paid
for it. It was the first time he had paid and might be the first time
ever, he said. He wasn't sure. He had got close a couple of times
but didn't know if he really had or not.
She didn't ask him to elaborate — just told him to relax and leave
it to her. Then she took off her bath robe and knickers, lay down
on the bed, and told him to take off his trousers and pants and join
her. She didn't react at all when she saw that his penis was limp
and small, as if it had been hiding under his clothes. With
difficulty, she put a condom on him, then did her best to encourage
an erection. It was many minutes before she felt any reaction on
his part, despite her soothing talk and practised hand. Then just as
he began to stiffen and she thought she might be able to help him
after all, he ejaculated, long before she could try to put him inside
her. His look of dejection and embarrassment touched her. She
told him not to worry and, as he hurriedly dressed to leave the
scene of such humiliation, tried to reassure him that he would be
fine next time. It was just nerves. She saw it happen all the time,
she said.
After he had gone, she dressed. As she reckoned up her night's
earnings, five with a condom and five without, the thought crossed
her mind that maybe she should become a sex therapist when she
retired. A few minutes later she was walking out of her front door
and on to the street. Hailing a taxi, she set off for home.
As she watched the familiar route unfurl, her thoughts drifted buck
to the student and she marvelled at the way education seemed to
slow down a person's sexual development. Not that being a student
had hindered her. In fact, it was when she was at college, about
fifteen years ago, that she had started on her career. Nobody could
deny it had been profitable, even if it hadn't been the career she had
envisaged when she left home. Short of money, as were many of her
fellow students, she had exploited her looks and joined an escort
agency. Tempted by the financial offers she received, she had
begun to spend the occasional night with those clients she found
most attractive. By
299SPERM WARS
the time she graduated, she was earning so much money from sex,
had accumulated such a large clientele of her own and, frankly,
was enjoying herself so much that she saw no point in embarking
on any other career.
At one time or another during her fifteen years she had
exploited just about every avenue by which an attractive girl could
make money from sex. A chance encounter gave her a brief spell
making hard-core pornographic films. In the main, it had been fun.
She laughed to herself as she remembered the contortions
necessary, amidst a dozen naked men, to get a penis in both hands
and all three orifices and still leave room for a camera. Even so,
when a rich politician from among her clients decided he wanted
exclusive access and set her up in an expensive flat in the heart of
the city, she had retired from her film career to become a
professional mistress. She didn't entirely give up having sex with
other men, but pretended she had — and got away with it.
Eventually, the politician's sex life had been exposed by a tabloid
newspaper and she moved on — this time to a judge.
After the judge died, conversations with some of her fellow
professionals led her into trying the streets for a while. In many
ways, she had enjoyed her time on the streets more than any other
phase of her career. It had certainly paid well. Eventually,
however, she gave it up. After a few close shaves, a bad
experience with a particularly violent customer had put her in
hospital for a few days. After that, she had moved into the relative
security of a bordello, which she also enjoyed. She only left when
her looks began to fade and she could no longer compete in open
parade with the younger girls. At least with her 'Model - first floor'
method of recruitment, men had already half committed
themselves by the time she opened the door. Anyway, she was still
attractive enough for most to accept her price rather than walk
away when they saw her.
She was going to retire soon. She knew she had been lucky and
that she should quit while she was winning. Despite several
thousand sexual partners in her lifetime, she had only had three
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
bouts of disease and all had cleared up quickly with the help of
antibiotics. She had been beaten up a few times, but no serious
damage had been done. Most importantly, though, she had
managed to avoid the drugs that had been, and still were, the
ruination of so many of her fellow prostitutes. For all these years
she had been making as much money each night as most people
make in a week, or even a month. There had been overheads, of
course — protectors to pay and places to rent. But even so, she
could have retired years ago and still have lived comfortably off
the interest from her savings. And the reason she hadn't retired was
simply that she enjoyed her job too much. She would be loath to
leave it all behind. In fact, she was seriously considering starting
her own escort agency or bordello when she did eventually decide it
was time to stop.
The taxi pulled up outside her home — a large detached house on
the outskirts of town. Her partner shouted from the kitchen that it
was good timing — the dinner was nearly ready and the children
were already in bed. She went upstairs, douched herself, then had a
bath. While she lay back in the warm water, her partner brought
her a glass of wine, then went back downstairs to finish the cooking.
Before going down to join him, she looked in on her four children,
each in their own bedroom. It would be interesting to know who
their fathers were. She liked to think that the two daughters, now
ten and eight, were fathered by the politician and the judge, but she
couldn't be certain. Her elder son was conceived while she was in
the bordello, and could be anybody's. Many of the clients were
men of wealth and status and there were several she wouldn't have
minded being his father. Her younger son should be her partner's.
She gave up working for a while specifically to conceive his child,
but she became pregnant so quickly they still couldn't be entirely
certain he was the father.
Her partner was five years younger than her. An ex-student and
an ex-client, he had volunteered to look after the children
in exchange for his keep and sexual access. They had been together
now for five years.
300 301SPERM WARS
After the meal the couple drank, and talked. For the first time
that week, they had sex before going to bed.
iologically, a prostitute is an individual who offers other
individuals sexual access in exchange for one or more
resources. In humans, the resource sought and offered is usually
money, but it might just as well be food, shelter or protection.
Nowhere is sperm warfare more rife than in the reproductive tract
of active female prostitutes. By the end of a night's work, the
number of sperm armies waging war inside a prostitute's body
often runs into double figures. And, from time to time, the winner
of that war claims the prize of fertilisation.
Prostitutes reproduce. Often, like the woman in the scene, they
reproduce very successfully. Why do some women abandon
fidelity, or secret infidelity, and openly pursue their reproductive
success via prostitution? When they do, how does their
reproductive success compare with that of women who pursue
more conventional strategies?
Female prostitutes have been, and are, an almost universal
feature of human societies. Anthropologically, only 4 per cent of
societies claim not to contain any. The remainder acknowledge
their presence. It is difficult, though, even in these societies, to
estimate what proportion of women engage in prostitution at some
time during their lives. Estimates of the number of overt
prostitutes active at any one time range from less than 1 per cent
of women in Britain in the late 1980s to about 25 per cent of
women in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, in 1974. Such estimates,
however, are unreliable and are probably underestimates. More
women than this will sometimes engage in prostitution.
Part of the problem lies in the lack of a precise definition.
Overt, promiscuous sex in exchange for money is, in many ways,
simply the least ambiguous exchange of sexual access for
resources or 'gifts'. Throughout human history and culture, there
are examples of men giving the woman (or her family) a 'gift'
around the time of their first intercourse, without the
302
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
woman being categorised as a prostitute. Often the exchange is
ritualised, as during marriage ceremonies. Even on the wedding
night, money may be demanded by the woman or her family
before intercourse is allowed to take place.
Clearly, there are degrees of prostitution. In principle it is
difficult to know where to draw the line between a traditional
prostitute exchanging insemination for money and a woman in a
long-term partnership exchanging insemination for support,
protection and 'gifts'. The woman in this scene is clearly a
prostitute, but what about the woman in Scene 18?
It is similarly difficult to decide for other animals just what is
prostitution and what is not. At one extreme, there are clear acts of
prostitution — like the female empid fly who trades sex for food.
For a male empid to be given the opportunity of mating, he first
has to find a swarm of gnats, catch one, wrap It In silk from his
salivary glands, then find a waiting female and offer it to her.
While she unwraps and then eats her meal, he is allowed to mate.
The larger the gift, the longer it takes her to feed, the longer the
male is allowed to mate, the more sperm he transfers, and the
more eggs he fertilises. Once he has gone, the male waits for the
next male to bring her food and to mate. In some species, females
are so successful as prostitutes that they never need to find food
themselves.
Migratory birds occupy a position at the other extreme of the
prostitution scale. Males return to the breeding areas first and
compete for the best territories — those in which they and a
female can most successfully raise their young. Females arrive
later and inspect the different territories and the males who defend
them. Each female then makes her choice of the best compromise
(Scene 18) between territory quality, male quality and availability
(because the best territories and males are quickly snapped up by
the earliest females). Eventually, a female will allow a particular
male to have sex with her. In lunge she is allowed to share his
territory. If the male is ousted by another, the female does not
leave with her former partner, but allows the new male to mate
with her in exchange
303
BSPERM WARS
for being permitted to carry on living in what is now his territory,
The female is intent on living in a particular territory and is
prepared to mate with any male who successfully lays claim to
that territory in order to do so. In principle, this is still prostitution
— the trading of sex for resources — even though it is taking
place within a monogamous relationship. As such it is little
different from the behaviour of the majority of women around the
world, few of whom would consider themselves to be prostitutes.
Men, also, of course can prostitute themselves. The young
gardener in Scene 18 is an example. In most circumstances,
however, it is much more difficult for a man to find a woman who
is prepared to pay, in whatever sense, for sexual access to his
body. Most men are only too willing to have sex with a woman
without any reward other than the sexual opportunity itself. In
contrast, for all the reasons we have discussed in this book (see
particularly Scene 28), women have much more to lose from any
single sexual encounter than men and usually need some sort of
pay-off to balance the potential cost. Only when a woman is eager
to collect a particular man's genes might she be prepared to pay in
some way for the privilege.
However we define prostitution, though, the woman in Scene
32 is clearly at the 'empid fly' end of the scale we have just
described rather than the 'bird' end. For her, prostitution is a way
of life. Biologically, it is also a strategy for reproduction — and,
moreover, a highly successful one. By her mid-thirties she had
had four children and had earned more than enough money to
give them a comfortable and healthy environment in which to
live. Each child had a different father, at least two of whom could
have been men of status. What all of the fathers had in common
was that they produced very competitive ejaculates: sperm armies
able to defeat those of many other men. The woman's sons, her
grandsons, and any later male descendants should also have an
above-average chance of producing competitive ejaculates. In
later generations, many people in the population
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
would inherit her genes because of the competitive success of her
male descendants.
This advantage of prostitution as a reproductive strategy is the
same advantage gained by any woman who promotes wholesale
sperm warfare in her tract (Scene 21). It is just that prostitutes
exploit this technique more often than any other category of
women in the population. Few other women, except those who
suffer gang rape (Scene 34) or who seek out group sex (Scene 21),
are ever likely to contain the sperm from as many different men at
the same time.
The success of prostitution as a reproductive strategy means
that most of us will contain the genes of a prostitute among our
ancestors. On average, we should each need to go back through
our family tree no further than the 1820s (seven generations)
before finding an ancestor who was born to a prostitute (assuming,
conservatively, that only 1 per cent of the population is conceived
by overt prostitutes).
As a way of life, however, prostitution has many risks. First and
foremost, as we have discussed on numerous occasions, there is a
high risk of contracting sexually transmitted disease. This factor
alone can condemn a prostitute to early infertility and death. Many
try to reduce the danger by using condoms but are forever fighting
against male aversion (presumably for reasons discussed in Scene
29). Prostitutes report men trying surreptitiously to remove the
condom that they have agreed to wear. Even since the advent of
AIDS, the majority of clients prefer not to use a condom. So
strong is the male body's preference for insemination that, like the
woman in Scene 32, many prostitutes are prepared to settle for
simply exploiting the situation by charging more for intercourse
without a condom.
There is also the danger of being injured or killed by a client.
Prostitutes attempt to reduce this risk by gathering together in a
brothel or massage parlour, by paying a man or men to watch over
them and provide protection, or simply by having a chaperon
(often their mother or father). By far the biggest danger to
prostitutes, however, is drug
304 305SPERM WARS
addiction — a danger both physically and financially. Despite
sometimes having to pay rent on the room from which they work,
or for protection, prostitutes have an earning capacity that most
other people can only fantasise about. Yet few prostitutes are rich.
In part, this is as a result of exploitation: young girls are first
introduced to the drug scene and then 'encouraged' into prostitution
as the only means of earning enough money to support their habit.
The agents then take their own commission for providing
'protection'. Such sad cases inevitably incur the costs of prostitution
without reaping the benefits.
Not only is prostitution a reproductive strategy for women, the
visiting of prostitutes is also a reproductive strategy for men. In
ancient Greece and Rome, almost all men inseminated a prostitute
at some time in their lives. In the USA in the 1940s, 69 per cent
had inseminated a prostitute at least once and 15 per cent did so on
a regular basis. In the UK in the 1990s, 10 per cent of men between
forty-five and fifty-nine years old have paid for sex at least once in
their lives. Apart from the occasional priest, the average man who
pays for sex usually has other reproductive outlets — in the UK,
for example, they are also more likely to have an above-average
number of unpaid partners.
As a reproductive option for men, prostitutes provide a target for
insemination that is quick and easy. The more prostitutes a man
inseminates, the greater his potential reproductive success. He may
also gain in other ways, depending on his situation. For example,
the young student in Scene 32 was hoping to gain experience
(Scene 27) that would later be of use in his more conventional
reproductive attempts with other women (on average, students lag
two years behind other people in their sexual experiences). Men
without a partner are simply including prostitutes in their search for
females to inseminate. Occasionally, a man may find a long-term
partner through his contact with prostitutes, like the woman's
partner in Scene 32. Men already with a partner are using
prostitutes as targets for their infidelity.
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
Prostitutes are also potentially expensive, both financially and In
terms of disease risk. Thus, although insemination is easy, as we
have just seen, the reproductive benefits are relatively low. Any
single ejaculate has a low chance of achieving fertilisation because
of the intensive sperm warfare that it will encounter. In addition,
even during long periods of unprotected sex, prostitutes are less
likely to conceive in any given month than a woman who is having
only occasional sex with a single partner. This could be due to
prostitutes having a lower rate of ovulation (Scene 16) or a more
efficient cervical filter (Scene 22). It could also be due to sperm
warfare. Perhaps such warfare is so intensive inside prostitutes that
the sperm armies from different men often neutralise each other.
A man needs to inseminate prostitutes many, many more times
than he does a conventional mistress in order to produce a single
child outside of his long-term partnership. Of course, no man
would say that his reason for visiting a prostitute is to gain a
chance of fathering a child. Nevertheless, from time CO time a
man will succeed in this, passing on to his child in the process the
genetic program that made his ejaculate so successful at sperm
warfare — prostitutes are unsuitable targets for men who are not
sperm war specialists (Scenes 19, 30, and 35).
The final conundrum is why some men are prepared to form
long-term partnerships with prostitutes. Clearly, such a man
experiences all of the disadvantages just discussed for a prostitute's
clients. Usually, however, he trades these costs against the benefit
of a share in her wealth. The man in Scene 32 traded his financial
and lifestyle benefit for effectively looking after her, her home and
her children. In addition, he had some opportunity to father a child
with her and may already have done so. His lifestyle probably also
meant that he would have a chance to inseminate other women as
well. His reproductive strategy was risky. The potential gains were
high, but so too were the potential costs. Apart from any other
genetic characteristic he needed to benefit from such a strategy, at
the very least it
306 307SPERM WARS
would have helped if he had also been a sperm war specialist
(Scene 35).
Given that prostitution and the use of prostitutes are both
reproductive strategies with high potential benefits and
considerable potential risks, prostitutes share many similarities
with bisexuals (Scenes 30 and 31). We do not know whether there
is a genetic predisposition for prostitution in the same way as there
is for bisexuality, but if there is, it would seem that only a minority
of women possess the genes for prostitution. So it is possible that,
as we concluded for bisexuality, prostitution is an advantageous
strategy only as long as it remains relatively uncommon, at least in
societies in which its costs are high. If all females were available to
all men, the potential value of prostitution and the reproductive
edge it would give each prostitute over other females would
disappear. At the same time, the spread of disease would greatly
increase.
If this 'genetic minority' interpretation of prostitution is
correct, the corollary, as for bisexuality, is that on average the
reproductive success of prostitutes and other women should be the
same. Without a genetic analysis similar to that which has been
carried out for bisexuals, however, we cannot be certain — and
there is an alternative interpretation. This is that all women are
potential prostitutes — but that only a few ever encounter a
situation in which they judge the potential benefits to outweigh the
potential costs. If this interpretation is correct, the corollary is that
women who judge the situation correctly and become prostitutes
should have a higher level of reproductive success than other
women.
This interpretation has less in common with our interpretation
of bisexuality (Scenes 30 and 31) than it has with our interpretation
of another high-risk, minority sexual strategy —rape. This is the
subject of the next two scenes.
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
SCENE 33
The Predator
The man locked his car, then made his way along the dark road.
As he walked, he could hear the sound of traffic a block away on the
main road running through the town. It was midnight but still hot,
and the pavement cafes and bars around the busy main square were
still crowded and noisy, mainly with holidaymakers. Turning away
from the square, he saw at the end of a narrow road the beacon he
was seeking. It was a telephone booth, shining out of the darkness
of a marble-tiled square outside a church.
He phoned home, checked with his partner that she and their two
children were well, and told her he would see her the following
night. With that, he walked a short way back down the road,
stepped into the darkest of shadows, and leaned back against cool
wall of the church. After checking the flick-knife in his back pocket,
he lit up a cigarette and settled back to wait. Apart from the glow of
the cigarette, he was totally invisible. His throat dried and tightened
in a mixture of excitement, fear and anticipation. The waiting was
the part he liked best.
The girl at the pavement bar was crying. The anger had gone but
the pain and worry were still there. Two tables away, laughing
drunkenly with his friends, was this holiday's sexual partner. As
she sat with her friends, she could feel the flowback dampening her
knickers. Scarcely more than an hour ago, they had had sex on the
grass in the nearby park.
She wasn't on the pill. All week, since they first met, he had
used a condom. Tonight, he had only pretended to put one on. As
if that hadn't been cruel enough, no sooner had he withdrawn than
he had gloated that she was the second that
308
309SPERM WARS
night — that an hour earlier he had been in the same spot with
another of the girls from their group. He always liked to have
more than one girl each holiday, he boasted, and if she really
wanted to know, he much preferred the other girl, anyway. But he
didn't mind carrying on having sex with her for the rest of the
holiday, if she wanted.
After insulting him to the limits of her vocabulary, she had
made her way drunkenly back to the bar to seek the sympathy of
her friends. Now, after the anger and the tears, she had the sudden
urge to speak to her boyfriend at home and to seek the reassurance
that at least he still cared for her. Clumsily, she stood up, her chair
falling over on to the pavement. She told her friends she was
going to the phone. Her best friend offered to come with her, but
she said she wanted to be on her own.
The man had been leaning against the wall in the shadows for
about fifteen minutes and was smoking his second cigarette when
he saw the girl appear at the end of the road. In all that time, only
one couple had come to the phone and the church square was now
empty. He waited, fully expecting someone to be with the girl.
But no, she was on her own. His luck was in, yet again. For a few
moments, she was back-lit by the lights from the main square and
he could see the silhouette of hips and legs through her thin dress.
Then she was in shadow and he heard, rather than saw, her
coming towards him. He took one last drag on his cigarette and
threw it away. His penis sensed action — beginning to stiffen into
the rod of iron that hadn't once let him down. This girl would be
his fifth this summer. He reached into the back pocket of his
trousers for the knife.
The girl had noticed the glow of a cigarette in the shadows but
was too drunk and too angry to sense danger. She barely noticed the
man as she passed him in the blackness, but a second later she was
grabbed from behind, a strong arm around her throat. The knife in
front of her face was silhouetted against the light of the distant
telephone kiosk. As he held her, she glimpsed a group of people
walking past the end of one of the other roads
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
leading away from the church. She wanted to scream, but fear of
the knife, the man's arm around her throat, and blind panic left her
totally mute.
From that first moment, everything seemed to happen at the speed
of light. Still standing behind her, the man pressed the cold metal
against her cheek and ear. Speaking softly, in a language she didn't
understand, he moved his arm from her throat to her waist and
made her bend forward, as if to touch her toes. He lifted her dress
forward over her head, placed his knife in her knickers and, with
two quick, practised cuts, removed them. Within seconds of
making her spread her legs, he was inside her. Fifty thrusts later,
he ejaculated. For a few seconds, he paused before withdrawing
and for one panic-stricken moment she thought he was going to kill
her. But he pushed her to the ground and ran off into the darkness.
Within a minute he was back in his car, driving to his hotel, two
towns away.
The girl lay sprawled on the ground in shock for several
minutes. Then came the tears. Eventually, she got up and moved
off, a sad, dishevelled figure. She saw no one. Back in her hot,
humid hotel room, she took off her clothes, stepped into the
shower, and stayed there for nearly an hour, washing and washing
herself. She fell on to the bed and spent the night half in shock,
half in sleep.
Inside her body, a sperm war raged between the armies from her
holiday lover and the rapist, while her right ovary made
preparations for ovulation. Two days later, while she was still
agonising over whether to tell her friends or the police, she
conceived. The war was over.
Daunted by the prospect of explaining what had happened to
police who did not speak her language, and worried by how her
boyfriend might react if he ever found out, she told no one about
the rape. A week later, back in her own country with her
boyfriend, she contrived on their first night together to have
unprotected sex.
On discovering her pregnancy, she first considered an abortion,
but with her boyfriend's reassurances that he would help
310 311SPERM WARS
raise what he thought was their child, she decided to keep it By
the time her baby was born, she had managed to convince herself
that it was probably his anyway. But it wasn't. Her son's father
was in fact a predatory rapist from a distant country.
iologists are rarely less popular than when they offer an
objective analysis of rape. If they say that rape yields
reproductive benefits, they are accused of encouraging the act. If
they conclude that rape has a biological basis, they are accused of
condoning it. If they dare to suggest that female behaviour may
sometimes invite rape, they are accused of violating womankind
just as surely as if they had committed the act themselves. Yet to
report proper conclusions is not automatically to encourage,
condone or violate. Are historians accused of encouraging warfare
if they conclude that a country benefited from a war? Are they
accused of condoning warfare if they conclude the behaviour has a
biological basis? Are they accused of violation if they conclude
that a country invited invasion? Or are they, on the other hand,
congratulated for incisive historical analysis and for aiding the
prevention of future conflicts ?
Prevention of socially unacceptable behaviour, be it rape or
warfare, demands a proper understanding of the circumstances
that trigger such behaviour. If the objective conclusion is that
under certain circumstances all men will rape or all countries will
go to war, there is no value in wishing or pretending that men or
nation states are somehow different. The value will lie instead in
identifying the circumstances that facilitate rape or war. Then,
some attempt can be made to ensure that those circumstances
rarely, if ever, occur. The only reliable pathway to understanding
the situation is via objective analysis, even if en route some
conclusions may be unpleasant, unpalatable or socially 'incorrect'.
The first step is to be clear about the phenomenon that we are
about to discuss. The rape in this scene was a sexual event
312
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
Which had a reproductive outcome. The girl was violated, but
Hot physically damaged, and was left able to conceive and give
birth. The rapist's weapon — in this case a flick-knife — was
used as a means of coercion, not to inflict physical damage. This
is the commonest scenario. As testament to the reproductive
nature of their behaviour, such rapists usually select victims who
are at their peak of fertility, aged between twenty and thirty-five.
On such occasions, the bodies of the men concerned are
clearly using rape as a reproductive strategy. On a minority of
occasions, however — albeit those which receive the widest
publicity — a woman is not only raped but is also physically
harmed, mutilated or killed. On these occasions the men
concerned are bent on violence and murder, not reproduction. As
testament to the non-reproductive nature of their behaviour, such
rapists are more likely to select older women, from their late
thirties onwards — women who are past their peak of fertility.
These latter, more violent events are not part of our discussion.
Here we are concerned solely with sexual events in which the
woman is not physically harmed by the rapist, at least not so
much that she is unable to conceive from the intercourse or later
give birth (though she may suffer psycho-logical consequences).
On these, the majority of occasions, the reproductive success of
both the rapist and the victim is influenced by their interaction.
Moreover, such rape often involves sperm warfare. This
relationship between rape, sperm warfare and reproductive
success is an essential and proper topic for consideration in this
book.
We have to ask whether rape can be a successful alternative
strategy in the male pursuit of reproductive success. And,
unpalatable as the question may be, we also have to ask whether
conceiving via a rapist attack can be an alternative strategy for
the female body, as well. Anthropologically, rape of the type
described in Scene 33 is common in nearly 50 per cent of
societies and is reportedly rare in only 20 per cent. It is estimated
that in some of the world's major industrial cities nearly half of
women experience an attempted rape in their
BSPERM WARS
lifetime, and a quarter are actually raped. Such estimates are, of
course, very approximate and confounded not least by the fact
that, as in our scene, very few rapes are actually reported. The
current estimate is that only about one rape in ten is made known
to the authorities. So widespread is rape and so often do children
result from rape that all of us could probably find a rapist among
the past five generations of our ancestors.
Humans are by no means the only animal in which rape is part
of the male sexual repertoire. The males of species as diverse as
insects, ducks and monkeys are all known to force copulation
under certain circumstances.
At least one insect, the male scorpion fly, has a special hook on
its wing which it uses to grip the female while it forces
copulation. Without that hook — for instance, if it is removed by
an experimental biologist — the female always escapes a male's
attempt at force. All males in this species have a hook, but not all
males need to use it. Females are attracted to the bigger males and
allow them to mate without being forced. Rapists in this species
are the smallest males, unattractive to females, who cannot obtain
a mate in any other way. Even so, they are relatively unsuccessful
and are lucky to force a mating more than once in their whole
lives. In contrast, the largest males have females queuing up for
their unforced favours. In this insect, therefore, rapists are males
making the best of a bad job, having been born small and
relatively unattractive to females. This is not the case for most
animals.
More often than not, rape is an extra option for males who are
in all other respects reproductively normal and attractive. Among
white-throated bee-eaters (a species of bird), for example, the
rapists are individuals who, having managed to breed early in the
season and having raised young with a monogamous partner, later
embark on raping forays. They chase any female who is still
fertile and who has been left unguarded by her mate, and attempt
to force insemination. Sometimes such females offer resistance.
At other times, like the girl in Scene 33, they may simply allow
the male to mate.
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
However the female birds behave, the outcome is the same. Not
only do rapists produce young with their partner, they also
produce a few through forcing copulation on other females. The
result is that, on average, rapists of this species have a greater
reproductive success than non-rapists.
As we shall soon see, it is crucial for our understanding of
human rape, particularly the response of the female, to know
whether rapists have an above — or below-average reproductive
success. Are human rapists more like the scorpion fly, or the
white-throated bee-eater? Are they reproductively below
average — making the best of a bad job after a lack of success
via more conventional strategies? Or are they above average —
adding their success via rape to an average success achieved
more conventionally?
Unfortunately, the evidence is a little ambiguous. There have
been a few, albeit rather weak, claims that rapists are, in fact,
like the scorpion fly, making the best of a bad job. Such
studies describe the average rapist as young, poor, and physically
unattractive to women. Other much more thorough studies have
shown that age for age, social status for social status, and
physical attractiveness for physical attractiveness, rapist are no
less likely than non-rapists to have a partner and children. If we
believe these latter studies, it would seem that on balance human
rapists, like white-throated bee-eater rapists, have the potential
for an above-average reproductive success. Whether they realise
that potential, however, depends on whether they succeed in
making the potential reproductive advantages outweigh the
potential costs. Like the other minority strategies discussed in
this section (bisexuality, prostitution), rape is a risky business.
Not only is there the ever-present possibility of infection, there is
also a real danger that rape will trigger strong and often violent
retribution.
First, there is some risk that rapists will be injured or even
killed by the victim herself — though, as in the scene, females
do not always resist. Secondly and more importantly, they are at
risk to retribution both from their victim's partner and from the
314 315SPERM WARS
society in general. Men do not stand idly by and watch their or
other men's partners being raped if they can prevent the attack.
Vigilante groups against rapists are by no means uncommon,
particularly in large cities. Nor are humans alone in showing such
defensive behaviour. The male members of a lion pride, for
example, will band together to repel attacks from marauding
gangs of bachelor males intent on gaining sexual access to the
females. Injuries, sometimes fatal, are commonplace.
In most modern human cultures, however, most of the
defence against rapists is institutionalised. Incarceration rather
than violence, injury or early death is a rapist's destiny if he is
ever caught.
Rape is clearly a dangerous reproductive strategy. It can be
very successful but it can also be a complete failure. As a result,
the successful rapists amongst our ancestors, those who left most
children and thus whose genes we are now most likely to possess,
were those who were the best judges of circumstances; those who
most accurately assessed (subconsciously) whether the potential
reproductive benefits of an opportunity to rape really outweighed
the potential costs.
So far, we have looked at rape as a reproductive strategy for
men. When we consider women and their physiological response
to being raped, we encounter an unpalatable conundrum.
Theoretically, if being raped is reproductively disadvantageous
to a woman, she should be less likely to conceive from it than
from routine intercourse. On the other hand, if being raped is
advantageous, she should be more likely to conceive from it than
from routine intercourse. So what happens? Are women more
likely, or less likely, to conceive via a rapist?
All of the available evidence points in the same direction. It
suggests that, like the girl in Scene 33, a woman is more likely to
conceive from rape than from routine sex with her partner. It is
just possible that this conclusion is false, the data reflecting
instead a greater probability that a woman will report rape if she
is likely to conceive. But this is unlikely for two reasons. First,
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
a woman has to report a rape long before she knows whether she
has conceived. Secondly, the difference in conception rate
between rape and routine sex is greatest during the least fertile
phases of the menstrual cycle — during menstruation and again
three or more weeks after menstruation. These are precisely the
times that a woman would least expect to conceive.
However reluctantly, therefore, we should accept that a woman
is more likely to conceive from rape than from routine sex. The
most plausible explanation is that the trauma of rape actually
stimulates ovulation, especially if her body happens to be 'on
hold' (Scene 15). We have already seen that rather violent roughand-tumble sex play can trigger ovulation in mink (Scene 28).
However, trauma may not be the only factor. Although a
woman is more likely to conceive from rape than she is from
routine intercourse with her partner, there are other, less
traumatic, situations in which she is equally likely to conceive.
One is when she has sex with a partner whom she has not seen for
a long time and whom she sees only briefly — as when a soldier
comes home on a short leave (Scene 15). Another is during
snatched moments of infidelity (Scenes 6, 17 and 19). What these
two situations have in common with rape is not trauma but a
limited opportunity to collect a particular man's genes. The
physiological mechanism for conception is also likely to be the
same in all three situations — ovulation in response to intercourse
(Scene 15).
It is not difficult to see why a woman should want to make the
most of a limited opportunity to collect the genes of a partner or a
lover. But why should she want to make the most of a one-off
opportunity to collect the genes of a rapist?
It was to answer this question that we needed to consider earlier
whether human rapists have an above- or below-average
reproductive success. As we have seen on many occasions in this
book, the genes of males who have an above-average reproductive
success are desirable targets for a woman's body.
If she can collect such genes, she will increase her reproductive
316 317SPERM WARS
success via male descendants who inherit the same potential for
success. Since we decided for rapists that, on balance, they do
indeed have above-average potential, it should be no surprise to
find that when a woman's body has a one-off opportunity to
collect a rapist's genes, it often does so.
This conclusion does not mean, as people often assume, that a
woman should therefore seek to be raped. On the contrary, it is
reproductively important to the woman that her body collect genes
from only the most successful of rapists. If she conceives to an
inept rapist, doomed quickly to be caught and to suffer social
retribution and incarceration, her male descendants would inherit
unsuccessful characteristics. As we discussed earlier (Scene 28), a
man needs to pass certain tests if his genes are to be acceptable to
a woman. The only way a woman's body can select out the most
successful of rapists is to do everything possible to avoid being
raped. She should avoid risky situations and take full advantage of
the protection offered by her partner, by other individuals, and by
the wider society. Whether she should also try to fend off the
rapist physically will depend on her assessment of the danger of
being physically damaged. Unlike the tests set by women during
rough-and-tumble sex play (Scene 28), she may often be better
advised to follow the example of the girl in Scene 33 and not
resist. A woman who follows this overall strategy is unlikely to
fall victim to any but the most cunning, determined and competent
of rapists. The result is that only a minority of women are ever
raped, but those who are may then respond by conceiving.
Our discussion should not end here. If rape can be a successful
alternative reproductive strategy for men, and if conceiving via
the more competent of rapists can be a successful reproductive
strategy for women, we need to ask why rape is not more
common. In particular, we need to discuss whether rapists are a
genetic minority, like bisexuals (Scenes 30 and 31), or whether
all men are potential rapists. This question will be examined in
Scene 34.
318
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
The only remaining question to answer here is why the rapist
In Scene 33 was the winner of the sperm war inside his victim's
body. In fact, the contest was very one-sided. First, the girl's
boyfriend, because he normally used a condom, failed to enter an
army until it was too late. The fertilisation trophy had already
been claimed. Secondly, all week her holiday partner had also
been using a condom. So when the day of our scene began, the
girl contained no sperm. On the night of the rape, her holiday
lover actually inseminated her. But this made little difference
because his body, unable to allow for having used a condom
previously (Scene 29), will have calculated that few sperm were
needed to top her up, it being only a day since they last had sex.
In addition, he had just inseminated another female and, as it was
their first intercourse, he would have given her a large inseminate.
The result was that the victim received from her holiday lover
only a small inseminate, one rich in young killers and egg-getters
but relatively low in immediate blockers. In addition, she had
ejected the flowback from that intercourse before being raped.
The overall result was that, when the rapist inseminated the
girl, his seminal pool had her vagina to itself. Moreover, his perm
were confronted with only a minimal cervical filter and a small
army of killers. He will have injected a large army, full of killers
and egg-getters. Admittedly, the holiday lover had an hour or so's
start, but ovulation was still two days away. It is likely that by the
time the egg-getters in her oviduct encountered an egg, they will
virtually all have been from the rapist. Another set of rapist genes
will have been passed on to the next generation.
319SPERM WARS ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
SCENE 14
Soldier, Soldier
A single shot rang out. A flock of large black birds flew noisily
out of the trees as the five soldiers threw themselves to the ground.
While the men lay quietly in the cover of vegetation by the side of
the road, the birds circled briefly above them before re-settling
one by one in the trees. Quietness returned. The soldiers looked at
each other, checking first whether anybody had been hit, then
whether anybody had any idea where the shot had come from.
They waited for a while, then crawled along the roadside on their
knees and elbows, seeking the cover of trees just ahead of them.
Once sheltered, they discussed the situation. A few minutes
ago, one of them had noticed a house. Almost hidden by trees, it
was by the side of a rough path that joined the road. A sniper in
the house might just have had one chance for a shot at them
through the trees as they passed. They decided to investigate and
planned their approach for maximum cover, splitting into two
groups: three to enter the front of the house, two to go in by the
back.
The house was small and in poor repair, but obviously
inhabited. There was no sign of a potential sniper at the windows,
but the soldiers took no chances in their final approach. It was
very hot and the group of three were soaked in the sweat of
exertion and tension as they paused by the front door. When they
burst in they found nothing more threatening than an elderly
couple, a baby, and a young girl of about twelve. Nevertheless, the
soldiers remained tense and alert. The girl ran screaming to her
grandmother, who was holding the baby. Adrenaline still coursing
through his veins,
the soldier in command asked the grandfather who else was in the
house. 'Nobody,' said the old man, fear in his eyes and voice. The
soldier hesitated, very much on the edge. He pointed HI the
children and asked the whereabouts of their parents. The old man
looked at his partner, then said they were dead, shot by people
like them.
The soldier looked around, told the old man that if he was lying
he also was dead, then ordered his two companions to search the
house. The pair moved tentatively towards me only other exit
from the room. It had no door, but a makeshift curtain. As they
reached the doorway, there was a sudden movement in the room
beyond. They dodged quickly to either side of the exit, guns
raised. One of them reached for the curtain just as they heard the
back door burst open. The other two members of their patrol had
arrived. There was the sound of scuffling, then the curtain was
thrown back and the two soldiers appeared, pushing a woman in
her late twenties in front of them. She fell to the floor. As she
raised herself to her knees, her daughter ran to her and clung
round her neck, sobbing.
The soldier in charge pointed his gun at the old man.
'You lied, you're dead,' he said.
'You did kill their father,' the old man replied.
'And now we're going to kill you,' continued the soldier, 'but
maybe not yet. I think you deserve to watch us have our fun, first.'
He ordered the others to check the house, inside and out. While
they were out, he stood over his captives, gun in hand, waiting
and smiling. The others returned. He ordered one to Watch the
back, another the front, and the other two to watch the old couple.
The soldiers knew what was coming, and began to relax. This
wasn't the first time during this war they had been in this position.
Their commander looked at the mother and her twelve-year-old
daughter, sobbing in each other's arms. Then he shouted to his
companions, asking them which it was to be, the mother or the
daughter. The mother shouted hysterically, clutched her
320 321SPERM WARS ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
daughter, and begged the soldier to take her, not the child. The
soldier pulled the girl away from her mother and threw her back
towards her grandmother. Then, prodding the mother with his gun,
told her to stand up and take off her clothes. When she was naked
he pulled her over to a table in the corner of the room, making her
bend over to rest her face and chest on the table. He had chosen the
location carefully, so that while standing behind her he could still
see the room. Once satisfied with his vantage point, he threw his
gun to one of his companions, opened his trousers, and entered the
woman from behind. Throughout the intercourse, he was coolly
vigilant, only losing his concentration during ejaculation itself. As
he removed himself, he told the woman to stay where she was.
Then he walked over to retrieve his gun and told the soldier who
had been holding it that he was next.
One by one the soldiers took it in turns to inseminate the woman
in front of her daughter and parents. Throughout her forty-minute
ordeal, the woman occasionally sobbed but, afraid that they might
turn on her daughter instead, did not once ask them to stop. When
all of the soldiers had had their turn, she slumped to the floor in
the corner, unable to look at anyone. The soldiers allowed her
daughter to run over and join her, but made her stay naked, not
allowing the grandmother to take over her clothes.
For a while, the soldiers sat around, smoking and laughing,
recovering from their exertion. Inevitably, somebody eventually
suggested that maybe they should have the daughter anyway. A
heated discussion broke out. Two of them voiced their disapproval
and swore at their companions for even considering the prospect.
But the soldier in command was keen. He told the other two they
could abstain if they wanted, but he was going to make the most of
their find. When the mother tried to stop him from taking her
daughter, he knocked her unconscious with the butt of his gun.
When three of them had raped the young girl, their commander
decided it was time to leave. They were just about
322
to open the front door when he told his companions to stop.
Turning to the grandfather, he asked the old man if he had really
thought he would forget to do what, on first arriving, he had
promised; then he shot him. Next, he turned his gun towards the
old woman, who was still holding the baby. He paused, finger on
trigger, then smiled. Telling her that her family had given him
enough fun for one day, he lowered his gun.
Two children were conceived that day, one by the mother and
one, against all odds, by the twelve-year-old girl. However, the
soldiers would never know nor care which of them was the father,
in either case. No sooner were they clear of the house than they
were all dead, gunned down by guerrillas. The young girl's father
had seen the soldiers approaching and gone for help.
e have already discussed the presence of predatory rape
in the male sexual repertoire (Scene 33). Our conclusion
was that rape is a strategy by which a man can increase the
number of women who might have his children. Any child sired in
this way is a bonus, an addition to those fathered via a
conventional long-term relationship. And in order to gain this
bonus, a rapist has to negotiate successfully the defences that
surround a woman. Rape is a risky strategy, and incompetent
rapists lose out rather than gain from their behaviour.
We have also discussed why women should do everything
possible to avoid being raped. Having been raped, however, a
woman may gain, reproductively, by then conceiving.
All of the arguments rehearsed in Scene 33 apply with equal
force to the 'gang rape' we have just witnessed (which is loosely
based on a documented event in a recent war). Before examining
gang rape in humans, we shall first look at the phenomenon in
other animals. Males of at least one species of monkey are known
to band together for this purpose. But the most detailed
information is available for birds, in which gang rape is
particularly common and has been described for many species.
323
WSPERM WARS
On his own, a male bird finds it almost impossible to force
copulation on a female. Intercourse in birds involves the male
balancing precariously on the female's back, then bending his tail
under hers. Most do not have genitalia as such, but simply a small
sac which they have to evert. Male and female sacs are similar,
and sperm are transferred by the male and female pressing their
sacs together once the male is in position. On his own, a male can
easily be dislodged from a female's back. Moreover, she can avoid
accepting his sperm simply by not everting her genital sac. A
group of males, however, can effect copulation by forcing her to
the ground through weight of numbers and then continuing to peck
and attack her until she accepts sperm transfer. Females who do
not comply have been known to die in the melee.
There are more benefits to gang membership than simply being
able to force insemination. A gang is also more able to brush aside
the female's defences, either her own or those of guarding males.
In some species of duck, for example, the gangs divide their
labour. On discovering a female and her partner, some of the gang
chase and keep away the guarding male, while the others rape the
female. Members of the gang swap roles, so that over a period all
benefit from their membership.
The benefit of gang rather than individual rape to male birds,
therefore, is that through cooperation they each increase their
chances of inseminating an unwilling female. The cost is that on
each occasion their sperm have to engage in warfare with sperm
from other males in the gang. Whether a male gains an overall
advantage from being a gang member depends on how these costs
and benefits balance out. Mainly, it depends on whether the greater
number of females a male inseminates through gang membership
compensates for his reduced chance of fertilisation on each
occasion. If he is a member of a gang of four, he has only a one in
four chance of fathering any child produced by their activities, so
only if the gang as a whole manages to inseminate more than four
times as many females as the male could on his own is his
membership worthwhile. For this reason, gangs tend to be rather
small. A group of ten will not be twice as effective
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
at raping females as a group of five — yet a male in the larger
gang has only half the chance of winning sperm warfare of a male
in the smaller.
As far as humans are concerned, a significant proportion of all
predatory rapes are gang rapes — even in peacetime. Some
estimates suggest that 70 per cent in industrialised societies are
gang rapes. Others suggest about 25 per cent. Inevitably, human
males gain all the same reproductive benefits from gang
membership as other male animals. The same arguments apply
and the size of human gangs tends to be small, usually four or five
individuals.
In our discussion of predatory rape in Scene 33, we left open
one very important question. If rape can be a successful alternative
reproductive strategy for men, and if conceiving via the more
competent of rapists can be a successful reproductive strategy for
women, why is rape not more common? There are two extreme
possibilities, just as there were for prostitutes (Scene 32). One is
that rapists are a genetic minority, like bisexuals (Scenes 30 and
31). The other is that all men are potential rapists — but that rape
still remains rare because few men ever encounter a situation in
which the potential reproductive benefits of rape outweigh the
potential reproductive costs (many of which are imposed by the
wider society (Scene 33)). Of these two possible explanations, the
latter seems likely to be nearer the truth — because in wartime the
incidence of all forms of rape, including gang rape, increases
dramatically.
There are three main reasons why this is so. First, having routed
its enemy, a successful army has effectively removed the males
who might otherwise defend the women. Secondly, the mobility
and confusion of war make it very difficult for rapists to be
tracked down. Thirdly, because of the ever present risk of
imminent death, the prospect of social recrimination for rape
seems trivial. On balance, therefore, unlike in peacetime, men In
the midst of war are much more likely to chance across a situation
in which the reproductive benefits of rape outweigh the costs.
324 325SPERM WARS
The increased incidence of rape during warfare is due to more
men becoming rapists, not to a limited number of men raping
more often. This pattern is much more what we should expect if
all men were potential rapists, rather than if only a fixed genetic
minority had rapist inclinations. Unpalatable though this might
be, it should be no more so than that other facet of male
behaviour highlighted by war — that all men are potential killers.
The soldiers in Scene 34 were essentially ordinary young men
who, had they been born at another time in another place, would
have proclaimed themselves incapable of either rape or killing.
Yet, in a wartime scenario, they found it within themselves to
commit both. This should not be so surprising. As we discovered
in Scene 33, we all possess the genes of rapist ancestors. For the
same reasons, we all possess the genes of past killers.
First, let us consider wartime killing. Few people would deny
that the predisposition to wage war against neighbouring
communities has a biological basis. Similar behaviour is shown
by many social animals, from insects to primates. Neighbouring
communities of chimpanzees, for example, each forty or so
strong, have been seen to engage in what can only be described as
inter-group warfare. One social group was observed over a period
of several months systematically murdering individuals from the
other group, until none were left. As far as humans are concerned,
historical inter-village battles in New Guinea and South America
should be regarded as little different, either in scale or in
territorial motivation. Only the distance from which the people
could kill each other was different. And although modern human
warfare between nation states is clearly greater in terms of scale
and mayhem, the behaviour, motivations and fears of the
individuals concerned as they kill each other are just the same.
Distasteful though it might be to accept, most people are alive
today only because at some time in the past the wider society in
which their ancestors lived successfully waged war
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
and killed people. That society either successfully attacked or
defended itself in warfare against an enemy intent on territorial
defence or expansion. History books are full of civilisations and
societies that have been annihilated by their neighbours.
Obviously, we are more likely to be the descendants of the
killers, and not of the ones who were killed, so we all have the
potential to kill. Whereas in wartime, many people are
continually encountering circumstances in which the benefits of
killing another person far outweigh the costs, in peacetime far
fewer people encounter such circumstances. Next, let us consider
wartime rape. We have all inherited our genes from those men
amongst our wartime ancestors who took their opportunities to
reproduce when they could, •von when it involved rape. We have
not inherited the genes of men who opted to wait for a safer and
more conventional opportunity in a future that for them never
came. Those men In Scene 34 who decided not to rape the young
girl did not live to produce more children who would inherit their
compassion, whereas one of the men who raped her did produce
a child to inherit his lack of compassion. It is by this process of
weeding nut genes that do not enhance reproductive success that
evolution has saddled the majority of men with the propensity to
behave as rapists in the appropriate situation.
Wartime rape and murder also combine to shape our
characteristics in the process known as genetic infiltration.
Warfare displaces and sometimes annihilates whole lineages by
this process. The invading armies annex lands and rape the
women. Then subsequent settlers establish relationships and have
children in less aggressive ways. By this means, whole genetic
stocks can be infiltrated and diluted almost out of existence by
more successful genetic lines. There are few people in the world
today who do not contain at least a few genes from ancestors
who, two thousand years ago, lived In a completely different
geographical area. Wartime rape is one of the key elements in
this ebb and flow of genes across the earth's surface. Not one of
us would be precisely the person
326 327SPERM WARS
we are today if one of our ancestors had not taken advantage of
the relative immunity of war to commit rape and murder.
Biologically, it might seem strange that the men in Scene 34
considered a twelve-year-old girl a suitable target. But,
unfortunately, it is not. Authenticated records show that women
have conceived at all ages between seven and fifty-seven, with
unconfirmed reports of women conceiving up to the age of
seventy. Reproductively, therefore, a predisposition to find any
woman between these ages to be sexually attractive is not totally
futile. Pre-pubescent girls may ovulate before their breasts and
pubic hair develop and before their first show of menstrual blood.
Post-menopausal women may conceive up to at least eighteen
months after their last period. In between, as we have discussed
at length (as in Scene 2), men are totally unable to judge whether
and when a woman is fertile.
As far as rape is concerned, young girls and older women are
in a sense victims of their gender's success at unconsciously confusing and deceiving men. Unable to decipher female fertility, the
male body has responded evolutionarily by a blanket approach —
inseminating whoever and whenever it can. As we have noted,
given the choice it will prefer women in their most fertile years
(twenty to thirty-five), but under some circumstances it will find
even very young and very old women attractive. Faced with four
females, one a baby, one twelve years old, one in her late
twenties and one in her sixties, all of the men in Scene 34 wanted
to inseminate the woman in her late twenties, three wanted to
inseminate the twelve-year-old, and none wanted to inseminate
the older woman or the baby. Under different circumstances, with
a more restricted choice for the men, the older woman might also
have suffered rape.
The two who were raped both ovulated and conceived. Perhaps
they were stimulated to ovulate by the rape itself, as we discussed
previously (Scene 33). This was almost predictable for the
mother, but was against the odds for the daughter. Given that
females might ovulate in response to rape, the chances of the
mother conceiving could have been as high as about one in
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
three. The chances for the daughter conceiving, however, were
probably no higher than one in fifty.
It is difficult to guess which of the soldiers sired the two
children. Inevitably, one of the features of gang rape is that it
generates intensive sperm warfare in the victim. All else being
equal, we might expect the first male who inseminated each
female to be the reproductive winner (Scene 21). He was the one
whose egg-getters got a head start in reaching the oviducts,
whose killers were first to take up their positions in the womb,
and whose blockers had the chance to establish themselves in the
cervix. However, as we discussed in Scene 21, much will have
depended on how quickly the subsequent men also inseminated
the female, on how efficiently each penis removed the seminal
pool from the man before, and on precisely when each female
ovulated. In Scene 34 the odds will have favoured the soldier in
command because he was the first to inseminate both females,
but any one of the doomed men could have left a descendant to
perpetuate his rapist genes.
SCENE 35
Men Are All the Same
The sound of laughter erupted from the corner of the bar. The
two women at the table looked around, suddenly feeling
Conspicuous — but they had drunk enough not really to care.
They leaned towards each other again, the taller of the two
making the shape of a cup with her free hand, determined to
convey to her friend just how big her partner's testes were. She'd
seen quite a few men's packages in her time, she said, and her
partner's were by far the biggest.
The two hadn't met for years but had exchanged the
occasional letter. Finally, they had decided it was time to meet
up again, so the other woman had invited her friend,
328 329SPERM WARS
her partner and their two young children to stay for the weekend.
Tonight, the men had wanted to watch some sport on the
television, so the women had decided to leave them to baby-sit
while they went out to get drunk and catch up on each other's
lives. Now that they were drunk, what they really wanted to talk
about was sex. In particular, they wanted to know about each
other's sex life.
The other woman wasn't sure that she would like big testes.
Her own partner, she said, trading information, had really small
ones, smaller than table tennis balls. His penis seemed a bit
small, too. Not wanting to miss the opportunity, the taller woman
said her partner's penis was definitely big. Sometimes she wished
it weren't quite so big. He tended to be really vigorous when he
was thrusting and sometimes he hurt her. She didn't know what it
was inside her that he kept poking, but it was certainly
uncomfortable. She also wished he didn't want sex quite so often.
Most of her friends, she said, were down to once a week, but,
even after all this time, she still had a job to keep him down to
two or three times a week. Even then she reckoned he
masturbated if she ever left him alone in the house.
That would be no good for her, her friend said. She wouldn't
be able to cope with having sex that often. Fortunately, her
partner also had a low sex drive — they were lucky if they
managed it twice a month now. It had been once or twice a week
when they first started living together, but it had soon declined.
As for masturbation — they had never talked about it. She wasn't
even sure he'd know how to. The taller woman laughed and then
expressed her amazement that they had never talked about it. One
of the first things her partner would tell her when she returned
after leaving him alone in the house was whether he had
masturbated. Maybe he didn't always tell her, but she thought he
did usually.
They paused to sip their drinks. The other woman hesitated,
summoning the courage to ask what for her was a big question.
Falteringly, in a quiet, confidential voice, she asked her friend
how often she came during sex. Without any surprise or
330
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
self-consciousness, the taller woman replied that she came
sometimes — but her partner expected her to come every time.
In the early days, she had told him once or twice that she hadn't
and he had sulked for hours. Ever since, if she didn't come, she
faked it. Besides which, she said, he could keep going for hours,
just waiting for her. If she didn't fake it, he would never stop.
Feeling uncomfortable, the other woman took another sip. She
found some consolation in her friend's answer, but not much.
There was a brief silence. She knew it was her turn to reciprocate
but couldn't decide whether to tell the truth or not. In the end, she
admitted that she had never come during sex. In fact, she didn't
think she had ever had an orgasm. When they pad sex, her
partner just stuck it in and ejaculated. Admittedly, he had tried —
at least in the early days. He used to fiddle around between her
legs during foreplay, but it had never really done much for her. If
anything, she used to get embarrassed rather than excited. In the
end, she had told him not to bother and just to get on with it.
Once or twice she had felt something during intercourse but it
had never amounted to anything. She wasn't sure whether it was
her or him, but she had just never got anything from sex —
except their baby.
In a matter of fact way that shocked her friend, the taller
woman asked if it was any better with other men. The other
woman smiled and shook her head. There hadn't been any other
men, she said. The taller woman asked if she meant never, or not
since she had been living with her partner. When told never, she
expressed disbelief, astounded that anybody could get to thirty
and only ever have had sex with one man. She must have had at
least twenty. When asked if she meant when she was younger or
if she had had other men since living with her partner, she
laughed at the innocence of the question and said both. She
expected at least one fling a year. She'd even had sex with
someone else while she was pregnant with her first child. The
thought of only having sex with her partner and missing out on
the excitement of someone new occasionally was unimaginable.
331SPERM WARS
Unsure of how she felt about her friend in the light of these
revelations, the other woman tried to think of a suitable
response. In the end, she simply said she didn't know how the
other managed to get away with it. Her own partner hardly ever
let her out of his sight and she was sure he would know if she
even thought about being unfaithful. Her friend said she
sometimes wished her partner were a bit more attentive. Not too
much, but a bit. Sometimes she thought he didn't care what she
did. He was never around when she needed him — for all she
knew, he could be having a different woman every week. There
were always women around him. He could take his pick. It
would be a hopeless task trying to turn him into an attentive
partner and father. In any case, if she did, it would give her far
less chance to enjoy herself.
She leaned forward and touched her friend's hand. Apparently
taking no account of the latter's confessed fidelity, she told her
what she should do if she wanted a partner who would give her
orgasms. In a whisper, she confided that the best lover she had
ever had had been gay. She hadn't realised until she had seen him
holding hands with another man in a bar a few weeks after they
had finished. He had been wonderful, and had always seemed to
know exactly what she wanted. Try and find yourself one, she
urged.
Her friend was just about to recoil at a prospect so alien to her,
when one of the men at the bar began to make his way unsteadily
over to their table. He put down his drink and balanced himself
awkwardly with arms outstretched, fists on the table. Dribbling
slightly, he observed that the two women looked as though they
knew how to have a good time. Why didn't they come with him? He
could give them a night to remember. Maybe they should toss a
coin to see who could have him first.
The taller woman told him to drop dead. When he didn't leave,
she stood up and pushed him away. He fell backwards on to the
floor, then got to his feet and swore at them before
staggering back to the bar. The woman sat back down, picked up
her drink and smiled at her friend. Deep down, she observed,
332
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
men were all the same. Drunk or sober, young or old, they were
only interested in one thing. If they had half a brain as well as
genitals they would really be quite dangerous.
exually, men are much more similar to each other than are
women. Virtually all men ejaculate (whereas not all women
have orgasms). Virtually all men masturbate (whereas nearly a
quarter of women do not). Virtually all men have nocturnal
orgasms at some time in their lives (whereas 60 per cent of women
do not). Nevertheless, men do still differ in the ways they pursue
reproductive success. There are roughly four different strategies.
One strategy mentioned in Scene 35 is bisexuality (discussed at
some length in Scene 30). The two other strategies described by the
women in the scene represent the two ends of the male spectrum of
sexuality. We have met these two types of men before in a different
context (Scene 19). One specialises in sperm warfare, the other in
avoiding sperm warfare. In between these two types lie the
majority of men who intermesh an avoidance and a seeking of
sperm warfare in as productive a way as possible. Just which
strategy a male is programmed to adopt will depend largely on his
rate of sperm production — which in turn depends on the size of
his testes.
Men have a pair of testes of unequal size (on average, the right
is 5 per cent larger), which hang in a scrotal sac at different heights
(more often the left is lower). The testes of all mammals originate
inside the body in the same position as the ovaries — and in many
species that is where they stay. In other species, such as humans,
they descend into the scrotal sac before birth and stay there
throughout life. In yet other species, the testes descend during the
breeding season, then go back inside the body for safe keeping
once the breeding season is over.
Scrotal testes are more vulnerable than internal testes and can
easily be damaged. The main compensation is that, because they
allow the sperm to be stored at a lower temperature than
333
SSPERM WARS
if they were stored inside the body, it is easier for the sperm to
keep fitter and healthier for longer. When men are naked, their
sperm are stored at a temperature that is 6°C cooler than if they
were inside the body, but when they are clothed, the difference is
only 3°C.
On average, taller and heavier (but not obese) men have larger
testes. Some men, though, have testes that are relatively large for
their body size; others have testes that are relatively small. This
difference is genetic and heritable. As long as there are no
associated clinical problems, even the smallest of testes can
produce enough sperm for fertilisation in the absence of sperm
warfare. Moreover, small testes are less vulnerable and less likely
to be damaged than larger ones. So why don't all men have small
testes? The answer is that when sperm warfare is likely, small
testes are a major handicap. The sexual strategy that a man does
best to pursue, therefore, is dictated to a large extent by the size of
his testes.
Men with larger testes manufacture more sperm per day,
ejaculate more often, and introduce more sperm at each
intercourse. Interestingly, they don't ejaculate more sperm during
masturbation. They spend less time with their partner, and are
more likely to be unfaithful and to choose a partner who will also
be unfaithful. The converse is true, in all these respects, for men
with smaller testes.
In short, men with larger testes are programmed to specialise in
the pursuit of sperm warfare — warfare which, because of their
large sperm armies, they are likely to win. Men with smaller
testes, on the other hand, are programmed to specialise in mate
guarding, fidelity and the avoidance of sperm warfare — warfare
which, because of their small armies, they would be likely to lose.
So who is the more successful reproductively, a man with small
testes or a man with large ones? The answer seems to be neither.
Just as for bisexuality, evolution seems to have produced a
balance such that men with large testes and men with small do
equally well.
To illustrate this point, imagine a population of men with
334
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
small testes, injecting few sperm into their respective partners
and making no attempt to inseminate other men's partners. Into
this population comes a man with large testes who not only
claims a partner of his own but also tries to inseminate other
men's partners. At first, he does extremely well. Every time he
inseminates another man's partner he is likely to win the sperm
war because he introduces a larger sperm army. Yet, at the same
time, he is safe from the possibility of 'cuckoos' appearing in his
own nest because other men are not inseminating his partner. As
a result, at each generation men with large testes produce more
children than men with small. Moreover, their male descendants
inherit their large testes, their promiscuity and their ability to win
sperm warfare.
But this success eventually becomes self-defeating. At each
generation there are more and more men with large testes —
descendants of the original invader — and in the end such men no
longer have an advantage. First, they are no longer assured of
winning sperm wars because the women they inseminate are
being inseminated by other men with large testes. Secondly, their
own partners are now vulnerable to being inseminated by other
men with equally large testes. Thirdly, the greater promiscuity in
the population puts everybody at greater risk to disease,
particularly the most promiscuous — such as themselves. Thus,
when there are too many men with large testes in the population,
the less well endowed ones who concentrate on guarding their
partner against other men actually do better. Not least this is
because such men are less at risk to disease and their smaller
testes are less vulnerable to accident and damage.
So if sperm war specialists with large testes ever become too
common in the population, they actually do worse reproductively
than men with small testes. We have met this situation before
(Scene 30) and the outcome should be the same. The proportion
of men with large testes settles down at the level at which, on
average, such men do no better and no worse than men with
small ones.
In Scene 35, the man with large testes was raising two
children
335SPERM WARS
who may or may not have been his. In addition, he may or may not
have produced other children with other women. The man with
small testes was raising one child, which was certainly his
(according to his partner). The latter male has greater certainty, the
former has greater potential. On average, however, the two types of
men should produce equal numbers of children.
In between these two extremes of testis size and reproductive
strategy lie the majority of men — those with testes of intermediate
size. These employ a 'mixed' strategy by which they try to strike
the best compromise between mate guarding and sperm warfare,
but specialise in neither. The presence in the population of this
'mixed' majority might seem to complicate the picture, but in fact
the conclusion remains the same — their proportion is also fixed at
the level at which on average their reproductive success is no better
and no worse than males with smaller or larger testes. In effect, as
long as a man pursues a reproductive strategy appropriate to the
size of his testes and his rate of sperm production, he should on
average do just as well as other men with different-sized testes.
The sperm war specialist in Scene 35 had a large penis as well as
large testes, whereas the mate-guarding specialist had a small penis
as well as small testes. This should not be surprising, given that the
penis does have a role in sperm warfare — the removal of any
seminal pool from the vagina (Scene 21). On the whole, however, a
large penis is not as consistent a feature of sperm war specialists as
large testes — because, compared with testis size, penis size
influences the outcome of sperm warfare far less often. After all,
penis size is important only on those rare occasions when a man
has sex with a woman very soon after another man — so soon that
the latter's seminal pool is still at the top of her vagina. In contrast,
testis size, via sperm number, is always important in sperm
warfare.
This explains why there has been much more pressure on sperm
war specialists to have larger testes than to have a larger penis, but
it does not explain why any man should have a small penis. There
is, of course, a lower limit to penis size — that
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
below which a man cannot introduce sperm far enough up the
vagina. There is also an upper limit — that beyond which a man
would be unable to thrust without damaging the woman. Within
(his range, though, why should any man have a penis smaller than
the upper limit? The answer is that within this range there is no
real disadvantage to a smaller penis (other than being an
infrequent handicap for sperm warfare) and there may even be an
occasional advantage.
On the one hand, a smaller penis is no disadvantage in terms of
sperm retention. First, it is not particularly less efficient at
delivering a seminal pool to the top of the vagina. This is because
even when a penis of below-maximum size withdraws after
insemination, the vaginal walls close behind it (Scene 3),
effectively pushing the seminal pool to the top of the vagina.
Secondly, penis size has no influence on the probability of a man's
partner having an orgasm during intercourse.
On the other hand, a smaller than maximum penis may even be
an advantage, particularly during routine sex. Everything depends
on the costs and benefits of a man removing his own seminal pool
whenever he inseminates a woman twice in rapid succession, say
within thirty minutes or so (Scene 25). On these occasions, a
smaller penis will be an advantage if the previous seminal pool is
better left in place. If the pool is better removed, a smaller penis
can still do the job — it just takes longer. In many ways, therefore,
a smaller than maximum penis endows a man with greater
flexibility than does a larger one. It is also less likely to be
accidentally damaged.
Testis size and penis size vary not only between males within a
population, they also vary between populations and races. On
average, even relative to body size, Negroes tend to have larger
genitals than Caucasoids, and both have larger genitals than
Mongoloids. The number of sperm inseminated during intercourse
varies accordingly. It has been claimed that these differences
between populations reflect different balances in sexual strategy,
just as they do between men within populations. In other words,
populations with larger genitals (on
336 337SPERM WARS
average) should contain more men pursuing sperm warfare than
populations with smaller genitals (on average). Although this claim
has not been tested for different populations within the human
species, it has been tested between species.
In some species of primate, such as chimpanzees, females often
mate with several males and nearly every conception involves
sperm warfare. In others, such as gibbons, females rarely mate with
a male other than their partner and conception rarely involves
sperm warfare. Linked with this difference, chimps have much
larger testes relative to their body size than do gibbons. Humans,
with 4 per cent or more of children conceived via sperm warfare
(Scene 6), are intermediate between the two, both in terms of
warfare risk and testis size.
Not only primates but many other groups of animals have been
shown to have testes of a size appropriate to the risk of sperm
warfare. From butterflies to birds and from mice to men, the more
likely a male's sperm are to engage in conflict, the larger his testes
relative to the size of his body.
SCENE 36
Exquisite Confusion
His moment had come. It was a year since his second partner had
left him, a year of celibacy, anticipation and nothing but
masturbation. But, unless he did something totally stupid, it looked
as though this was going to be it.
It wasn't the first party he had thrown since she had left. It was
an easy way of filling the house with lots of young women (and a
few men). But it was the first at which he had managed to keep
anybody's attention for more than about ten minutes. He had
targeted this young girl, nearly thirty years his junior, the minute
she walked in the room. A friend of a friend, she stole his attention
immediately. He had waited until she looked
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
drunk, then moved in. They had been talking for hours. Even when
she had gone to the toilet, always a dangerous moment, she had
come back to him. For the last hour, their conversation had been
about sex. With an honesty born out of drunkenness, they had
traded increasingly personal details, such as how often (hey each
masturbated and how many partners they had each had. She was
well into double figures and sometimes despaired Of herself, she
confided, but she could never really think of a good reason to say
no.
She began to look sad and emotional. He said she shouldn't think
badly of herself. Without her experiences, she wouldn't be the
person she was now: so worldly, so relaxed and so attractive.
Those past sexual experiences had surely helped her become the
person that he, for one, was now finding so irresistible. With that,
he had stroked the side of her face with the back of his fingers. She
leaned her face against his hand and small tears appeared in her
eyes. She smiled and apologized as he wiped the tears from her
cheeks. Then, as he continued gently to touch her face, tracing his
fingers round her eyebrows, nose and mouth, she looked him in the
eyes with an expression he recognized from a previous lover - she
wanted sex. There were still people in the room, but the pair of
them were now oblivious. He moved his hand from her face to her
neck, then back again, stroking with his finger tips. Then he moved
down and traced round the edge of her low-cut dress, briefly
slipping his fingers inside so that they brushed over an erect nipple.
She made a tiny noise in her throat. His moment had come. He
took hold of her hand and suggested they go somewhere more
private. Unhesitatingly, she let him lead her.
As he led her upstairs to his bedroom he congratulated himself.
Maybe, at last, he was becoming competent at the sexual arts. The
thrust of the conversation he had just used to interest this girl had
been almost identical to the one he had used when he first seduced
his last partner, ten years ago. In fact, apart from this girl's
relatively tiny breasts, she could almost be his last partner.
338 339SPERM WARS ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
Within seconds of bolting the door, they were lying naked on the
bed and he had started the routine that according to his ex-partner
had made him an exquisite lover. His hands, lips and tongue began
to move over her body, with varying degrees of lightness and
strength. It was a well rehearsed routine that had never failed to
stimulate her to orgasm when she was as aroused as this girl seemed
to be. She used to lie there as he caressed her, getting more and more
excited as he spent more and more time massaging her clitoris until
she eventually climaxed. However, as he worked slowly over the
young girl's body, judging the right moment to move to her clitoris,
he realized that she wasn't reacting. Then suddenly she seized him
by the neck and kissed him passionately, almost violently. Taken
aback, he did his best to respond before trying to take the initiative
again. Rolling her on to her back, he forced his hand between her
legs. For him it was an unfamiliar angle, and she was moving so
much he couldn't find her clitoris. He had rarely had such a
problem with his ex-partner. But then she had always lain still
while he stimulated her.
Thrown from his usual routine, he placed his fingers in the girl's
vagina instead. She was very wet. But instead of allowing him to
gently move his fingers up and down, in and out of her vagina, as
did his ex-partner, she responded by vigorously rubbing her pelvis
against his hand for a few seconds. Then she quickly maneuvered
him on to his back and herself up his body. Next, in a movement he
had never come across before, she seemed to grab his penis with
her vaginal lips and virtually suck him in. He felt awkward lying on
his back because he was used to being on top. He tried to start
thrusting but the girl was thrusting too. His ex-partner used to lie
still and leave him to orchestrate the whole intercourse. But then,
she had usually climaxed during foreplay, if she was going to
climax at all.
Concentrate though he might, he just could not synchronize his
thrusting to the girl's. He kept coming out. Each time she lost his
penis, she would simply relocate it with her vaginal lips and suck
him in again. In the end, he gave up trying
to thrust and left all the movements to her, patiently and politely
waiting for her to climax before he ejaculated. The sounds in her
throat grew louder and louder. Then, suddenly, she stopped - no
contractions, no apparent release or relief, no anything. As she
stopped moving he began to thrust, but he was too late. Without
waiting for him to ejaculate, she removed herself and lay
breathlessly on the bed, leaving him erect, wet and frustrated.
As she lay, recovering, he kissed and stroked her. Desperate to
inseminate her, he tried to keep her interest, but it didn't work. A
few minutes later, she got off the bed and started to dress. He
assumed she was going to the toilet, but as she got to the door she
said goodbye. She had really enjoyed it, she said, but she had to
go. He protested that he hadn't yet come. She told him to do it
himself - if she had more time she would help him, but she really
had to go. Her boyfriend was coming to pick her up and take her
home. As she opened the door, he suggested they should do it
again sometime. She smiled, shook her head, and went.
After dressing, he went back down to the party, but most people
had gone and none of the girls still there attracted him. He ushered
the last few people out and went back to bed. But he couldn't sleep,
even after masturbating. He couldn't believe he had missed his
chance. He was nearly fifty and still he couldn't guarantee making
the most of his opportunities. It wasn't that he was inexperienced -
just that he had never met anybody like this girl before.
He had had little opportunity to learn about sex during
adolescence, and hadn't really got to grips with intercourse until he
had met his first partner. During their fifteen years together they
had produced two children. Yet not once in their entire relationship
did she have an orgasm. She had been totally passive. She didn't
like him touching her between her legs and refused to allow his
face anywhere near her pubic hair. Because of their lack of
foreplay, she was rarely wet when he tried to enter her. To get
herself lubricated, she used to urge him to put
340 341SPERM WARS
the tip of his penis just inside her vagina and then work himself
backwards and forwards gently. Once he was fully inside, she then
liked him to ejaculate quickly. If intercourse lasted too long, it was
as if she became embarrassed. On more than one occasion, she had
actually made him stop and withdraw because he was taking too
long. Ironic though it seemed in hindsight, he had convinced
himself while he was with her that there was no such thing as the
female orgasm.
When he was thirty, he had his first opportunity to be
unfaithful. At a party at work, one of the junior girls had started
stroking his leg with her foot. They went back to his office and
lay uncomfortably on the uncarpeted floor. Assuming she would
want the same as his partner, he missed out foreplay completely
and, in a tangle of half-removed skirt and knickers, trousers and
pants, tried to penetrate her immediately. She was offended by
his lack of consideration and disappointed that she wasn't going
to get an orgasm. Suddenly she had seemed to become aware of
the discomfort of the situation and equally suddenly became
overtaken by guilt - she, too, had a partner at home. Pushing him
away, she said that maybe sex wasn't such a good idea after all,
and left.
He nearly suffered the same fate three years later when he
tried to make love to his first real mistress. She, too, took offence at
his initial urgency. But instead of dismissing him after the first
occasion and despite being ten years his junior, she set about
educating him - and there was a lot he needed to know. For
example, in all his time with his partner he had neither touched
nor seen her clitoris. In truth, he didn't even know she had one
and, with the benefit of hindsight, he suspected that neither did
she. Two things his mistress did share with his partner were a
mild liking for having her nipples sucked and a strong dislike of
having his face between her legs. Whenever he tried, she
restrained him. He never did in fact see her clitoris. However,
she managed to show him both how to find it with his fingers
and, having found it, what to do with it. She didn't like him to
touch the clitoris bulb directly, preferring him to
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
massage and squeeze the area around it. But she never wanted to
climax during foreplay. He became expert at judging the right
moment to move from using his fingers to using his penis. And as
long as he judged the moment correctly, she always seemed to
climax during intercourse. Somehow, though, he always had the
feeling that she was faking it.
This first infidelity lasted a year and passed undetected by his
partner. It ended when his mistress met someone nearer her own
age. A year later, he began his second affair. He was now
relatively experienced at the deceptive techniques of infidelity, but
was still not fully convinced that the female orgasm was a reality.
As it turned out, his second mistress was not the person to
enlighten him.
Most of the time he was with her he felt like her puppet. They
worked together and from time to time had legitimate reason to
spend time together away from their respective partners.
Eventually, she let him into her bed on condition that he did not try
to penetrate her. On their first night, she helped him to ejaculate in
exchange for having him stroke her body and, particularly, to place
his head between her legs and lick her. At first he had no idea what
he was doing. Though he was now thirty-five, she was the first
woman who had actually urged or even allowed him such intimate
contact. Yet she was virtually insatiable, wanting him to lick her
genitals, thighs and anus for twenty minutes at a time so that she
was covered in his saliva. Even so, she never had an orgasm or
even became excited; she seemed to find his attention therapeutic
rather than stimulating.
A year later, on what was their tenth assignation, she was still
insisting that he could only have his excitement as long as he did
not penetrate her. This time, their business was abroad and they
were away for a fortnight. For two nights, he let her tell him what
to do but on the third night, as they lay naked and he had his head
between her legs, his excitement and frustration at last took him
beyond the threshold of reason. He slid up her body, kissing her as
he went. Then, while kissing her face and
342 343SPERM WARS
mouth, he slipped his penis into her vagina. She immediately
struggled but he pinned her down, smothering her protestations
with his mouth and free hand. She became violent, hitting and
scratching him whenever she could free a hand. But he was too
strong for her and so excited that he ejaculated quickly. When it
was over, she called him a bastard - but didn't throw him out. I Nor
did she get dressed, and within an hour she was taunting him into
forcing her to have sex again. Over the remaining week, they had
sex every night. Each night, he had to find a different way of
restraining and forcing her. She conceived that week but three
months later miscarried when her partner, having been denied sex
for well over a year, decided to leave her rather than bring up
somebody else's child.
Until his mistress miscarried, our man had been tempted to leave
his partner and help her raise the child. After the miscarriage,
though, he could not face the prospect of years of having to force
sex, and finished the relationship. But it 1 was too late. His partner
had been told of his affair by his mistress's, and three months after
finding out she left him for another man, taking their two children
with her.
There followed three short relationships, each girl as different
from the others as she could be. The first was afraid of sex. Raped
as a young girl, she had a fear of the erect penis that distressed him
almost as much as it did her. They drank excessively. Over the
course of a year they shared a bed perhaps five or six times, but
never managed to have intercourse. He didn't realize her similarity
to his last mistress until, at their last meeting, she asked him to rape
her. He obliged, emotionally torn at watching her distress as he
forced his penis inside her. Unlike his last mistress, however, she
did not come back for more and he never saw her again.
Now nearly forty, his next experience was a great shock. He had
been out celebrating with a small group of friends from work. They
had all returned to the house of a young couple barely in their
twenties, and were soon plunged into a drunken party with very
loud music and much raucous
344
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
laughter. Almost immediately the party was under way, the female
host had disappeared to her bedroom. She returned a few minutes
later wearing a short, almost transparent, white dress. Then,
seemingly unnoticed by her very drunk partner, she openly took
the hand of one unattached man after another and led him away to
her bedroom. When it came to his turn, she told him she had been
saving him till last. She took him upstairs and, without locking the
door, removed his trousers and underwear. As she took off her
knickers, he could smell the semen from the previous men.
Sitting on the edge of the bed, she began to give him oral sex.
From the noises she was making, she was becoming excited even
faster than he was. Eventually sounding frantic, she pulled him on
top of her and scrambled with her hands to insert his penis. As he
pushed himself in, she let out a blood-curdling scream and her
body began jerking wildly. The violence of her reaction was such
a shock to him that his erection began to fade. He carried on
thrusting, trying to rejuvenate himself. But just as she was
building up to a second crescendo and his own ejaculation was
only seconds away, her partner burst into the room. Only an
instant before he ejaculated he was pulled off her, pushed to the
ground, and ordered out. With apparently little surprise and with
minimal aggression, her partner proclaimed that now it was his
turn. Hardly faltering in her build-up at the change of penis, the
girl released yet another blood-curdling scream.
His third experience was with an exotic woman with whom he
had sex about five times. The first two times were clearly a
disappointment to her. She had refused to let him enter her
without extensive foreplay. Yet the foreplay he provided,
borrowed from his technique with his first mistress, seemed to do
nothing for her, and on each occasion it was with reluctance that
she eventually let him have intercourse. The third time, she told
him she would do it herself. She masturbated in front of him and,
after she had climaxed, allowed him to have intercourse. Years
later he was to realize that, had he
345SPERM WARS
already experienced the woman who was to be his second longterm partner, he would probably have been able to excite this
woman. What she did to herself was precisely what that second
partner later taught him to do to her. After twice watching his
exotic lover masturbate, he began to feel fairly incompetent. In
the end he found himself wondering if what she really wanted was
for him to force her, like his second mistress. He tried this, failed,
and was thrown out, never to be invited back.
Soon afterwards he met his second long-term partner, twenty
years his junior (the woman who had just left him, taking their
child with her). The first time they had sex she was so upset by
his urgency that he almost forfeited his second chance. Instead,
she relented and taught him what she needed. After two or three
years of education he became quite proficient. Quiet and
sensuous, she liked him to stroke her gently while she lay back,
soaking up the sensations. Unlike his first mistress, however,
sucking her nipples did little for her. She showed him precisely
where her clitoris was and how to find it. She liked the bulb itself,
once lubricated, to be rubbed and massaged directly.
Eventually, he could virtually guarantee giving her an orgasm
during foreplay, as long as she wanted him to. Rarely, very
rarely, did she have or even want an orgasm during intercourse,
saying they were so weak they weren't worth having. When each
episode began, she would tell him whether she felt like an orgasm
during foreplay or whether she just felt like intercourse. If she
changed her mind or if for some reason he was unable to excite
her, she would openly masturbate to satisfy herself. And she told
him about her nocturnal orgasms. As far as he knew, none of his
other partners had experienced them.
After ten years with her, he had felt able to excite and satisfy
any woman. Tonight's events had proved him wrong. Shocked
and disappointed, he drifted off to sleep in a sea of confused
thoughts. He would never understand women.
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
ompared to men, women are incredibly varied in their sexual
characteristics. Some women (2—4 per cent) never orgasm;
others (5 per cent) have multiple orgasms, scarcely coming down
from one climax before building up to the next. Ten per cent never
climax during intercourse; another 10 per cent nearly always
climax. Some prefer to be totally passive in their build-up to
climax during intercourse; others prefer to be more active. Fifty
per cent masturbate regularly; 20 per cent never do. Finally, 40 per
cent have nocturnal orgasms, whereas others cannot even imagine
such an event.
Added to, and often associated with, these differences in orgasm
pattern are differences between women in the sensitivity of
different parts of their bodies. Some women have sensitive
nipples; others do not. Some have a clitoris so sensitive that they
dislike the bulb being touched; others have one that responds very
little to stimulation.
It is not quite true that no two women are the same - but to
many men it often seems that way. Why is there so much variety
to female sexuality, and what bearing does such variety have on
the female pursuit of reproductive success? The answer is that it is
yet another manifestation of the advantages gained from confusing
men (Scene 2) and testing their abilities (Scene 27). It works
because, as we have seen before (Scene 27), men have to learn
their sexual technique.
The man in Scene 36 was bemused. However, he wasn't quite
the failure he imagined himself to be. In fact, reproductively, his
life was fairly successful. He had two children with his first
partner and one with his second (assuming they were all his). But
he could have had even more. At different times during his life he
had the opportunity to impregnate seven other women, and to
varying degrees he had failed each time. On some occasions he
failed even to inseminate. On others, he failed to handle the
relationship either well enough or for long enough to have a
346
347
CSPERM WARS ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
realistic chance of paternity. The nearest he got to a child with a
further woman was with his second mistress. Eventually, her body
allowed him to fertilize one of her eggs. But it took him a year of
missed opportunities, and that was just too long. Had he
impregnated her earlier, he might successfully have deceived her
partner into raising another's child. Then the baby might never
have been miscarried and his reproductive success might have
been 33 per cent higher than eventually it was.
His failure to capitalize on opportunities to reproduce with
these seven women was due in every case to some combination of
surprise, shock and misjudgment. He did what he could, but he
was confused by the sheer variety of female sexuality. As he
moved from woman to woman he tried to extrapolate from his
past experiences. He assumed that techniques of seduction,
stimulation and insemination that had been successful in the past
would be successful in the future. To some extent, his approach
worked - his gradual accumulation of experience with different
females slowly increased his awareness and competence in the
sexual arts. But, even after encounters with eight very different
women, he still failed to inseminate a ninth.
In some species, experience gained by a male with one female
can readily be extrapolated to another. In other species, however,
such extrapolation is less successful - and it is least successful in
those such as humans in which the underlying female strategy is
the confusion of males. Then, not only do individual females
confuse their partner through unpredictable swings of mood and
behavior (Scene 2), but also the female population as a whole
manages to confuse through variety. As was clear from Scene 36,
a woman gains in three main ways from being as different as she
can be from other women.
First, she can set each man a much more challenging test of
experience and competence (Scene 27). From this she can quickly
learn whether he has a little or a lot of experience of other women.
Because women are so different, a man will only have
encountered her type before and thus know how to treat her if he
has had a lot of experience. If her priority is to avoid
disease or to find a faithful partner, she may actually prefer a
naive man. On the other hand, if her priority is to find a man who
is genetically more attractive (Scene 28) she may prefer someone
whom many other women have found attractive (Scene 27).
Secondly, she has more initial control at each sexual encounter
with a new man, which lasts for as long as it takes the man to
fathom the best way to relate to her. The result is that she has
more time to assess the man as a long-term partner. In Scene 36,
three women tested the main character sexually, but managed to
avoid being inseminated before rejecting him. One took longer to
decide how she felt about him, but was able to keep both the
number of inseminations and sperm retention down to a minimum
in the process. Two others managed to avoid insemination for
nearly a year while they made up their minds. One finally rejected
him, and the other conceived but later miscarried.
Thirdly, after accepting a man as a partner, she can still educate
him in her needs without facilitating his infidelity. In the scene,
two of the women (his first mistress and his second long-term
partner) evidently found the man's other qualities attractive
enough to tolerate his initial sexual incompetence. They then
began the relatively long process of educating him in helping
them to climax (Scene 27). This could have been self-defeating, if
his increased competence had made it easy for him to seduce
other women. Of course, it did help him a little, but not as much
as it would have done if women were more similar. His first
partner pursued the ultimate version of such a strategy. By not
having orgasms herself, she could not educate him at all. As a
result, she made him miss one opportunity for infidelity and
slowed him down in taking advantage of another.
Although it is not difficult to see that women can benefit
considerably from being different from one another, there has to
be a limit to this range of possibilities. Different though women
may be in their individual sexuality, therefore, we can
nevertheless still recognize a number of broad categories. These
categories are probably genetic, are probably in some sort of
348 349SPERM WARS ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
balance in the population, and are probably all most successful if
they are not too common.
We have met evolved balances of genetic categories before in
earlier scenes. The proportion of bisexuals and heterosexuals
(Scenes 30 and 31) and the proportion of men with different-sized
testes (Scene 35) are both examples of different categories coexisting in an evolutionary balance. When too common, each
category has a success rate that is below average. When rare, each
has an above-average success rate. The incredible variation in
female sexuality is simply the most complex example we have yet
encountered of such a balance. As in all previous examples, our
expectation will be that the balance point has been fixed by
evolution such that reproductively all of the different categories do
equally well.
So, what are these different categories? More importantly, are
the categories different simply for the sake of being different, or is
each category linked to other aspects of sexual behavior? The latter
seems the more likely. Just as large testes (Scene 35) and
bisexuality (Scene 30) predispose some men to specialize in
particular sexual strategies, the different orgasm patterns shown by
different women will also predispose them to particular sexual
strategies. For example, some orgasm patterns will help the women
concerned get the most out of the promotion and exploitation of
sperm warfare. Others will help the women concerned to get the
most out of fidelity and an attentive partner. Very crudely, while
accepting that the tremendous variation in female sexuality largely
defies categorization, we can make life easier for ourselves by
recognizing four main types.
The first consists of women who are programmed sometimes to
have (and sometimes not to have) the full range of possible
orgasms (masturbatory, nocturnal, foreplay, intercourse and postplay - with some being multiple). Although only about 5 per cent of
women have absolutely the whole range, an additional 25 per cent
have all except multiple orgasms, and an additional 40 per cent
again have all except multiple orgasms and nocturnals. All women
in this category can manipulate sperm retention in all
of the ways we have discussed (Scenes 22 to 26). In particular, they
can vary the frequency with which they have and do not have every
type of orgasm so as to take maximum advantage of the men and
opportunities which present themselves. They are thus probably the
women most able to exploit sperm warfare whenever it is
advantageous to do.
Although as a whole this first category of women is probably the
largest (about 75 per cent), there is tremendous scope for women to
differ within the category. For example, about 30 per cent within the
category both masturbate and have nocturnals, whereas 50 per cent
only masturbate and 10 per cent only have nocturnals. These
differences probably reflect variety for variety's sake, as we have
discussed. Masturbation and nocturnals are alternative means to the
same end (Scenes 22 and 23). Variation in emphasis on one or the
other outlet allows women to differ. It may also influence their
scope for secrecy in preparation for infidelity (Scene 23), but it is
unlikely to have major repercussions on their ability to manipulate
sperm retention. In addition to differences between women within
the category, each woman also has so much scope for varying her
own behavior (from phase to phase and man to man) that she need
never become predictable.
The second category consists of women who are programmed to
avoid one or other of the major avenues for the manipulation of
sperm retention and warfare. Either they do not have solitary
(masturbatory and nocturnal) orgasms or they do not climax in the
presence of men. In most cases, however, such women sacrifice
only a little of their manipulative ability. In compensation, they gain
by being slightly less common. Thus, about 10 per cent of women
are programmed neither to masturbate nor to have nocturnals, which
has the effect of del-egating responsibility for the manipulation of
sperm to orgasms in a man's presence. The full range of sperm
manipulation is still possible (via orgasms during foreplay,
intercourse and post-play - Scenes 22 to 25), but it becomes much
more important to the woman that she chooses a sexually competent
man. Other
350
351SPERM WARS ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
women (again about 10 per cent) are programmed never to climax in
a man's presence but do masturbate and/or have nocturnals. They also
have the full range of sperm manipulation. They can secretly prepare
a strong or a weak cervical filter- but what they cannot do is change
their minds at the last minute and bypass an over-strong filter (Scene
25).
The third category consists of those 10 per cent of women who
climax virtually every time they have penetrative sex. Such women
can still manipulate sperm retention, and thus play an active part in
influencing the outcome of sperm warfare - as long as they vary the
timing of their climax relative to the moment of insemination (Scene
25). An orgasm more than one to two minutes before the man allows
low sperm retention; any time thereafter allows high sperm retention.
The final category consists of those 2-4 per cent of women who
never orgasm, either during intercourse or via masturbation or
nocturnally. In compensation, as mentioned above, such a woman
gains by not educating her partner in sexual techniques that would aid
his infidelity. Unlike those in the previous three categories, such
women are the least able to influence the outcome of sperm warfare.
They are, however, well suited to the relatively safe process of
selecting a mate and making the most of that relationship. They do
have some control over sperm numbers, largely through waiting for
their cervical filter to weaken with time since their last intercourse
(Scene 22). But since sperm numbers are far less important for
conception than they are for warfare, in the absence of any possibility
of the latter it does not really matter how many sperm such a woman
retains from each intercourse.
Although it is possible to retain too many sperm for conception
from a healthy ejaculate (Scene 19), it is much more difficult to
retain too few. Admittedly, ejaculates containing few sperm are often
sub-fertile, even if the woman retains them in full. But this is not
because they contain few sperm - even vasectomised men who
occasionally introduce tiny numbers of sperm (perhaps fewer than a
hundred) into women have
fathered children. It is rather because the clinical conditions that
cause some men to introduce few sperm (perhaps only tens of
millions instead of hundreds of millions) at the same time render
their ejaculates sub-fertile.
The women in this final category do, of course, lose the benefits
of orgasm as a defense against infection. But then, of all the
categories of women, they are also the least likely to encounter
sexually transmitted diseases. In any case, it seems that even women
programmed to avoid manipulating sperm via orgasm may
nevertheless begin to orgasm if they are ever exposed to genital
infection. Just how they do so will depend on their anatomy. If their
clitorises are sensitive to stimulation they may suddenly experience
the urge to masturbate. However, it is often part of the programming
of such women that their clitorises are relatively insensitive to
stimulation. This may make it difficult for them to masturbate to
orgasm but, of course, in no way prevents them from climaxing
nocturnally. Clitorectomised women, for example, may still have
nocturnal orgasms.
The predisposition of different women for different sexual
strategies adds a final nuance to mate selection - an element that can
be added to those we have already accumulated (Scenes 18, 20, 21,
27, 28). This is that a woman should seek a partner whose approach
to sperm warfare complements her own. The small-testicled man in
Scene 35 who specialized in mate guarding was a good choice for
the woman who never climaxed. Similarly, the large-testicled man in
the same scene was a good choice for the woman with a varied
orgasm pattern who could gain the most from infidelity and sperm
warfare. This woman gained in two ways. First, her partner's
specializations for sperm warfare meant that his large sperm armies
gave the armies from her other lovers a good run for their money.
Secondly, because he pursued infidelity himself, he often left her
free to pursue her own reproductive success by following the same
course.
The final point to stress is the one we have stressed in other
scenes in this chapter - on average the different categories of women
should all reproduce equally well. The proportions of
352 353SPERM WARS
each category in the population will have stabilized at precisely the
appropriate level for this to occur. Consequently, no woman should
be hindered in her pursuit of reproductive success by the orgasm
regime with which she has been programmed - as long as her choice
of mate and subsequent behavior are compatible.
CHAPTER ELEVEN
Final Score
SCENE 37
Total Success
The old man reached out a gnarled and wrinkled hand. His stiff
fingers touched the hand of the woman sitting next to him outside
their home. She turned her head towards him, looking blindly
through opal eyes, and smiled. Eventually, everybody had come,
some of them traveling for days to be there. For the first time in
decades, the old couple were surrounded by their whole family, the
product of their long lives together. Including themselves, there
were five generations present. Their eldest son was now nearly
seventy; their youngest great-great-grandchild, just two weeks old.
The old man looked at his partner's face, his eyesight as keen as
hers was faded. The reality in front of him was a deeply wrinkled
face, blind eyes that so cruelly imprisoned her, kind mouth and a
one-toothed smile - she was so proud of that last tooth. But, for a
moment, what he saw was the smooth, beautiful face, clear, dark,
mischievous eyes, sensuous mouth and gleaming teeth that had so
fired his senses over seventy years ago. He still remembered, as if it
were yesterday, how he had chased her through the forest and, on a
bed of sweet-smelling leaves, had explored and entered her taut and
perfect body for the very first time. She had been a wonderful
partner, mother and grandmother, the perfect companion throughout
354SPERM WARS FINAL SCORE
life. He could remember only one phase, as she approached
menopause, when their relationship had been strained - but it had
lasted a mere five years.
He had had many opportunities to be unfaithful, and at times had
been tempted, but he had always resisted, so afraid had he been of
disease and of losing his princess. His last chance had been in his
early sixties when a flirtatious young girl of twenty, so impressed by
his status and well preserved body, offered him hers for the night.
But he had turned her down. It was one of the best decisions of his
long life, because five years later she was dead. She had succumbed
to the sexually transmitted disease which had become the scourge of
their community and which she had probably been harboring on the
night she offered herself. What would his partner and his family
have done for the last twenty-five years had he died and not been
around to sort out their problems and give them the benefit of his
experience?
The night after his last chance for infidelity, he and his partner
had sex for the very last time. Somehow, ever since, it had never
seemed worth taxing their ageing bodies with the effort - they
couldn't have been closer, sex or no sex. Now, swamped by the
emotion of the occasion, he told his partner that she was looking
wonderful.
Once again, the old woman smiled her one-tooth smile. Deep in
her stomach, the pain that was now her constant companion was
temporarily eclipsed by the sheer pleasure of hearing her family
around her. She squeezed her partner's hand. It was ten years since
she had been able to see him. No longer need she be troubled by the
reality of his frailty and his recent deterioration. More and more, the
image in her mind was not the worn old man she last saw with her
failing eyes but the muscular young athlete she had known all those
years ago. She still remembered, more clearly and accurately than
him even, the first time she had surrendered her body to him as they
swam naked in a lake.
It had been a few years before she conceived their first child, but
after that it had been easy. She had never really felt tempted
to be unfaithful. As her partner had grown in wealth and status, her
biggest fear had been that she would lose him. There had been long
spells in their life when she had found him irritating and arrogant,
but he was always kind, considerate and fun. As their family had
grown, not once had she found herself wishing for a better partner
or provider. She asked him once again to tell her who was there -
for a start, could he see all their children?
He looked around the huge group of people gathered outside their
home. Not only their family but the whole village had assembled for
the celebration, which was planned to last all day. The children
were running and chasing, many laughing, a few arguing or crying.
The adults were in scattered groups, some sitting on the ground,
others standing. Most were drinking, eating morsels of food, and
anticipating the main meal. Everywhere was the sound of
conversation, laughter and occasional raised voices as people
renewed old family friendships and feuds.
One by one, the old man located their five children. As he named
each one he saw, she nodded. They were all there. She had had eight
children but two had died in early childhood and a third, after
having a family of his own, had died a few years ago in his fifties.
Now the grandchildren, she urged him. He knew there should be
twenty-three but couldn't remember all their names. He picked out
the dozen he knew best, all in their forties, then had to rely on his
partner to supply the names of the younger grandchildren, some of
them still teenagers or younger. She remembered their names
clearly, but that didn't always help as he couldn't even begin to
remember what some of the younger ones looked like. Even so,
when she told him a name, he said they were present.
When the list was complete, she sat back in satisfaction. Twentythree surviving grandchildren. That was three more than her
lifetime friend and rival who, after a complicated and colorful life
of great sexual activity, had died ten years ago. Now, she missed
their camaraderie. They had been lucky. Most of their generation
had either died young from disease or
356 357SPERM WARS
FINAL SCORE
accident or had been infertile, or had lost many of their children
before they reached adulthood. Between them, she and her friend
had populated a large proportion of the village.
The old man said he hoped that she wasn't going to ask him to
count their great-grandchildren. She shook her head and laughed.
He could see the oldest, now nearly thirty, with her new-born, their
most recent great-great-grandchild. Last night, the old woman said,
she and their daughter had worked out that there ought to be fiftytwo of them and four more on the way, and already there were
sixteen great-great-grandchildren. He sat back and relaxed, freed
from his task of child-counting.
'Just look what we have done,' he remarked with satisfaction, not
for the first time forgetting her blindness. She squeezed his hand
again, then let him go, concentrating on the noise and conversation
around her.
Suddenly, there was a commotion. A gang of naked children ran
across the clearing as a group of young men, naked apart from a
belt around their waists, emerged from the forest. On their
shoulders the leaders were carrying the first of three large animals,
already skewered on a wooden spit. The food for their feast had
arrived.
n the course of this book, scene after scene has documented
incidents of infidelity; moments and situations in which
successive characters have snatched the opportunity to try to
increase their reproductive success just that little bit more than their
contemporaries. This final scene is a reminder that with the right
person in the right situation, the best way to achieve the greatest
reproductive success can sometimes be within a monogamous
relationship.
The scene is also a reminder that long-term relationships,
including monogamous ones, are estimated to have been a feature
of human sexuality for around three million years. Our huntergatherer ancestors (Scene 16), from the savanna of Africa to the
forests of South America and South-East Asia,
358
from the aboriginal outback of Australia to the Eskimo heart-land
of Canada, almost always formed long-term male-female
partnerships, most of which were monogamous. Unlike the
relationship in Scene 37, these partnerships did not necessarily last
a lifetime. Often a person had two, or even three, successive
involvements. But each one was monogamous (give or take an
occasional infidelity) while it lasted, involved deep personal ties,
and lasted for several years - very similar to what happens in
modern industrial societies.
Only during the fifteen thousand or so years of dependence on
agriculture did many human cultures switch to polygamy. Women
clustered around the men of greatest wealth - those with the largest
areas of cultivated land and those with most livestock. Even
polygamous relationships, however, are long-term and involve deep
ties between the male and each of his females. The women are
expected to be faithful to the man and he is expected to be faithful
to his designated collection of women.
Not until the advent of urbanization and industrialization over
the last few hundred years has there been a wholesale swing back
towards monogamy, or serial monogamy. But even now women
still cluster around the men of greatest wealth and status (Scene
18).
The woman in Scene 37 made a good decision, not to be
unfaithful. If, as it seems, her partner was the best provider around
and had the best genes available, she had nothing to gain
reproductively from infidelity (Scene 18), and everything to lose
(Scenes 9 and 11). She had only done a little better, however, than
her close friend who had had a much more varied sex life.
Presumably, this friend did not start with the advantage of such a
good partner. Had she opted to be faithful, she might have been less
successful - again, reproductively -than she was. How successful
the two women were may have had more to do with their ability to
attract a good mate than with their strategy of fidelity or infidelity.
They each pursued the best strategy for their circumstances.
The man in the last scene also made a good decision in
359
ISPERM WARS
avoiding infidelity. He did have much to gain (Scene 13), but he
also had much to lose (Scenes 9 and 11). In particular, in his
community there was always a real risk of contracting a lifethreatening disease, as well as the cost of losing his 'princess'. She
was fertile, faithful and a good mother and grandmother. Any
gains from infidelity might not have balanced the costs.
Although the majority of people do not pursue a lifetime of
pure monogamy, most (with few exceptions - Scenes 19 and 30)
achieve the greater part of their reproductive success within longterm relationships. Then, as long as the individual judges the
moment and the situation accurately, infidelity, rape, group sex,
prostitution, partner swapping and so on are all strategies that
provide the opportunity to be just that little bit more successful,
reproductively, than would be possible solely within a single
relationship. But all carry risks if badly executed or if the
individual does not have the weaponry of physique or character to
carry them through.
Maybe the couple in the last scene, particularly the man, could
each have achieved greater reproductive success through infidelity
and sperm warfare - but in all probability, because of their
circumstances, they would not have done. Their reproductive
strategy of faithful monogamy had, for them, been a total success.
Even though the couple in Scene 37 were monogamous and
faithful, they still could not escape the shadow of sperm warfare.
It is irrelevant that neither of them actually engaged in sperm
warfare. Their bodies will still have spent a lifetime 'on alert' for a
war that never came.
Everyone's body - with no exception - is similarly alert. Continuously throughout reproductive life, the body both assesses the
likelihood of sperm warfare and makes the appropriate
preparations. When the likelihood is low, some preparations are
made but they are minimal (Scenes 12 and 22). From time to time,
however, absolutely every body contemplates behavior
FINAL SCORE
that could lead to sperm warfare - and when it does, such
contemplation triggers an escalation in preparation (Scenes 13 and
26). More often than not, the contemplation is mere fantasy and the
preparations unnecessary - no war ensues. But even in our own
generation, the majority of men at least once in their lives act on
their fantasies and enter their sperm into battle
- and, at least once in their lives, the majority of women do
likewise and promote sperm warfare. When war does break
out, each person's body will have done its best to make sure
that it is well prepared and that there is a chance the war will
work to its reproductive advantage.
Few people will have thought deeply about sperm warfare and
its consequences before reading this book. Yet, if the phenomenon
did not exist, human sexuality would be far less colorful. Without
sperm warfare during human evolution, men would have tiny
genitals and produce few sperm. Women would not have orgasms,
there would be no thrusting during intercourse, no sex dreams or
fantasies, no masturbation, and we should each feel like intercourse
only a dozen times or so in our entire lives - those few occasions
when conception was possible and desirable. Sex and society, art
and literature — in fact, the whole of human culture - would be
very different.
Over the millennia, sperm warfare has helped to shape society.
In contrast, the last few years have seen two developments - one
social and one scientific - which in their turn could
change the face of sperm warfare. The social development
was the emergence of child support agencies as governments
tried to shift financial responsibility for the children of women
without partners away from society and on to the absent father.
Interestingly, in their attempts to avoid or defer their support,
men everywhere have responded by invoking sperm warfare -
expressing doubts about their paternity of this or that child.
In the past, most such claims of non-paternity would have
remained unresolved. However, the scientific development -
genetic fingerprinting - has provided a relatively conclusive
method of testing such claims (Scenes 16 and 30).
360 361SPERM WARS FINAL SCORE
It is interesting to speculate how a world of child support
agencies and paternity tests might change sexual strategy and the
role of sperm warfare.
The main repercussions are twofold. First, men will find it more
difficult to have sex and run (Scenes 13 and 29). No longer will it
be as easy to deny paternity and leave child-raising to the woman.
Secondly, women will find it much more difficult to trick men into
raising children who are not theirs (Scenes 6, 8, 13, 16, 17, 18, 26,
31, 33 and 35). It is not difficult to envisage a future in which men
will routinely pay for (or even be entitled to!) a paternity test at the
birth of each child they may be legally forced to support.
Although these two ancient strategies will become much less
successful, alternative strategies, uncommon today, will become
more successful. For example, women will become much freer to
have children by several men. Not only might they gain
genetically, they might also gain from obtaining long-term
financial support from a number of men (Scene 18). In the process
of having children by several men, women should still seek to
promote sperm warfare so that their male descendants will have
competitive ejaculates (Scene 21). But no longer need women risk
dependence on meager support from the state as a result of their
strategy. They will, of course, find it more difficult, if not
impossible, to hide their actions from any partner, but then they
will have less need to do so. In fact, they will have less need for a
partner at all. Even if they have a partner, his desertion need not be
as crippling as in the past. In their turn, men could exploit this
potential earning power of women. No longer need they fear being
tricked into raising another man's child - if they take on such a
child it will be knowingly, having judged that they have more to
gain than to lose (Scene 15). Often, they may even calculate that
the extra income their partner could generate through having other
men's children could actually help them to raise their own children
more successfully.
Although such behavior by men and women could make longterm relationships less common - and will certainly change
362
their nature - such relationships will probably still happen. Men
will still try to avoid sperm warfare by guarding a mate (Scene 9)
and women will still try to recruit a partner to help with all the
other, non-financial, aspects of raising their children (Scene 18).
But the financial arrangements for child-raising and the ability to
identify paternity could well shorten such relationships, removing
as they do two of their main functions. The reproductive life of
both men and women will centre on a succession of relationships,
each lasting just long enough to produce one or two children.
As far as men are concerned, the balance of reproductive
success is likely to swing even more strongly in favor of those of
wealth and status than at present (Scene 18) - subconsciously, this
may even be why child support legislation appeals to the lawmakers! Only wealthy men will be able to afford to have children
with a number of women, and hence only such men will be
targeted by many women. Poorer men, when they do get a chance
to inseminate extra women, will be under pressure to make
themselves even more untraceable than at present.
Some things, of course, will never change. Nothing - short of
castration, brain surgery or hormone implants - can remove a
person's subconscious urge to have as many grandchildren as they
can. So, nothing will remove a man's subconscious urge to have as
many children with as many women as his genes and
circumstances will allow. Similarly, nothing will prevent a woman
from subconsciously trying to collect the best genes and recruit the
best support for her children that her genes and circumstances will
allow.
The coercive 'one-family, one-child' legislation in China has
neatly highlighted how basic reproductive strategies adapt to
social change. The legislation has successfully reduced the mean
number of children (to 1.6 per woman). But in so doing it has also
changed the sex ratio (through selective abortion and infanticide -
Scene 16) to 1.6 boys for every girl. Why? Intrinsically, the
coercion impinges more on a woman's potential reproductive
success than a man's. A successful man
363(such as those who conceived and imposed the legislation?) can still
have many children if he can surreptitiously inseminate many women
and win sperm warfare. In contrast, the only way a woman can
generate more grandchildren than her contemporaries is by having
such a successful son. A man also, of course, benefits reproductively
from fathering a successful son. Whatever people's conscious reasons
for wanting sons so badly in modern China that they are prepared to
kill their daughters, their biological response is precisely what would
be expected if they were trying to enhance their reproductive success.
All of the sexual strategies described in this book will adapt to any
new environment. Whatever the effect on society of future scientific
and social developments, sperm warfare and its associated behavior
seem destined to be an ever-present feature. As such, it will continue
to be the major force in the shaping of human sexuality over the
generations to come.