
287SPERM WARS
Looking around the tables, she wondered if he would still be
there. This was their first real date, though he had been pushing
her for some time. She didn't really want to deceive her partner,
especially now. The latter's problems over access to her son and
the worry of her abnormal cervical smear results were putting
them both under considerable strain. Somehow, though, she didn't
feel quite as guilty about a clandestine meeting with a man as she
would with another woman.
It was over a year since she had had sex with a man. In fact,
her current lesbian relationship had been so rewarding that she
had begun to think she would never feel like sex with a man
again. She had always known she was bisexual, ever since she
was a child. Throughout childhood and adolescence she had
persuaded girlfriend after girlfriend to take off their clothes and
get into bed with her. Once in her mid-teens, however, she had
also given in to the occasional male.
At first she had just been curious about heterosexual sex, but
after a few experiences had actually begun to enjoy it, in its own
way. More than anything, though, she had enjoyed the feeling of
power she could have over boys. Compared with her girlfriends,
first the boys and later the men had seemed so gullible, so easy to
manipulate and deceive, that she had found it difficult to respect
them. Also, men were so sexually inept; so selfish. As long as she
was in the mood, she could virtually guarantee that another
woman could give her an orgasm. With a man, she nearly always
had to apply the final touches herself, if she felt like it. So what
was she doing in this restaurant, clandestinely meeting a man?
She really didn't know, except that perhaps she was ready for
another experience — and this man really was rather attractive. A
hand waved from the corner table. She waved back and went to
join the hand's owner.
On the other side of town, while the pair in the restaurant ate,
the girl's lover was lying naked on the bed, bringing herself to a
climax. Afterwards, she went into the sitting-room to relax with a
bottle of wine, music and a book. But she couldn't settle. There
had been something strange about her lover's manner
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
for the past day or so and it was bothering her. Suddenly, she
began to look up the telephone number of the bar where the girl
and her friends usually went after their lectures and meetings. She
phoned, asking to speak to her, intending to suggest that she came
and joined them. It wouldn't be the first time. She was told,
however, that neither the girl nor her friends were there. Deciding
they must have gone elsewhere, she tried to If settle down to her
book once more.
There was an inquisition when the girl eventually returned —
late, but not unduly so. The story she gave was that after their
meeting her friends had decided they should all try somewhere
new. Eventually, she convinced her partner she was telling the
truth, but there was still an atmosphere between them when they
went to bed.
In fact, the girl and her male escort had not had sex that
evening, but it was only a week before they did. Afterwards, as
the weeks passed, their relationship developed in a way that she
had only thought possible with a woman. Her infidelity to her
lesbian partner became increasingly difficult to hide as she found
herself wanting to spend more and more time with her lover. Her
ingenuity was stretched to the limit. She also began to feel guilty at
what more in the way of trouble she might be giving to a woman
whose life was becoming increasingly fraught in every way. Her
repeat smear again indicated abnormal cells — and she began the
stressful process of having further tests and waiting for results. As
if that wasn't bad enough, she continued to be denied access to her
son and was passed over for promotion at work when the rumour
that she was a lesbian, which had been in the air for a while,
began to spread. The woman had begun to suspect that her young
lover was unfaithful to her, and increasingly they began to argue.
Their worst fight was sparked off when they accused each other
of faking orgasms. But she still couldn't be certain about her
partner's infidelity — right up to the moment, that is, that the
latter broke the news of her pregnancy. At first, she tried to
convince her that they could look after the baby together, but
288 289SPERM WARS
the girl was adamant about moving out and living with the baby's
father.
For a time, the woman was ill with stress and loneliness. After
losing her job, she began to feel suicidal. But then, in! the depths
of depression, she met a man who had just been) deserted by his
partner and family. They counselled each other out of their joint
despair and within weeks were living together. A year later, she
had his child — a daughter. Not long afterwards she was operated
on successfully for cervical cancer, and from then on her life
improved.
Once her son became independent of his father, he came to see
her. Untainted by his father's homophobia, he quickly grew close
to his mother and his younger half-sister and they became very
much a family. Although the woman died relatively young, in her
sixties, it was not before she had enjoyed fifteen contented years as
a doting grandmother.
aving discussed the way that homosexual behaviour can
aid men in their pursuit of reproductive success (Scene
30), it is relatively straightforward to do the same here for
women. This is because there are many similarities between male
and female bisexuality and relatively few differences.
Even those differences that do exist are largely just a matter of
degree. For example, on average across societies there are fewer
bisexual females than males — a trend that is also shown in most
animals. In any given human society, there tend to be about a
third to half as many women bisexuals as men. In large industrial
societies, in which only about 6 per cent of men show
homosexual behaviour, about 2-3 per cent of women do so. In
societies in which all men show homosexual behaviour, about 30-
50 per cent of women do so. This difference means that on
average we should each need to go slightly further back in our
family tree to find a female bisexual than to find a male. But the
difference is only about one generation — back to about 1850
instead of 1875.
290
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
Not only are there fewer female bisexuals than male, but on
average they begin their homosexual (lesbian) activities a little
later in life. Only 50 per cent of bisexual women have had their
first homosexual experience by the age of twenty-five, and only
77 per cent by the age of thirty. Some do not have their first
lesbian experience until they are in their forties.
Another difference between male and female bisexuals is that
bisexual women do not have as many homosexual partners as
bisexual men. Only 4 per cent of bisexual women have more than
ten homosexual partners in their lifetime compared with 22 per
cent of bisexual men. Similarly, women are more likely to have
longer-lasting 'monogamous' relationships with each other than
are men. A common pattern, shown by the girl in the scene, is for
a woman to stay in a homosexual relationship for one to three
years before moving on to a heterosexual relationship. Also as in
the scene, older women often 'fit in' a stable homo-sexual
relationship between successive heterosexual ones.
Compared with these minor differences between male and
female homosexual behaviour, there are many important
similarities. For example, most women who show homosexual
behaviour are bisexual. Fewer than 1 per cent of women in any
society are exclusively homosexual throughout their lifetime.
Over 80 per cent who show lesbian behaviour also show
heterosexual behaviour, as did both women in Scene II. All
human societies contain bisexual women; moreover, female
bisexuality is genetic and inheritable. And, like all of the
characteristics we have discussed, female bisexuality is
widespread among different species of mammals, birds and
reptiles. In fact, there is one species of lizard which consists only
of females. These will not develop eggs unless they are first
mounted in a pseudo-copulatory act by another female. They take
it in turns to mount each other and to stimulate each other's egg
production.
The many similarities and few differences between male and
female bisexuality are significant enough to justify a similar
Interpretation of the two types of behaviour. When we compare
291
HSPERM WARS ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
the reproductive success of female bisexuals and heterosexuals,
we reach precisely the same conclusion as we did for men (Scene
30) — as a strategy for the pursuit of reproductive success, female
bisexuality is a real and successful alternative to heterosexuality.
Briefly, bisexual women reproduce earlier than heterosexuals
but are also more at risk to disease and an early curtailment of
their reproductive life. Just as for men, the net advantage of
bisexuality tends to be greatest when the behaviour is rare. The
proportion of women in any given population who are bisexual,
therefore, should reflect the level at which the costs and benefits
just balance each other.
In many ways, we know more about the costs and benefits of
female bisexuality. This is because it is much easier to know how
many children a woman has had at different stages in her life than
it is a man — especially a man who has had many different
partners. For example, we know that by the age of twenty a
bisexual woman is four times more likely than a heterosexual to
have a child, and that even by the age of twenty-five she is still
twice as likely. The woman in Scene 31 had had one child by the
time she was twenty and two by the age of thirty-one. By the end
of their reproductive lives, however, bisexual women tend to have
fewer children than heterosexual. In Britain in the 1980s, for
example, one survey gave the average figures to be 1.6 children
for bisexuals and 2.2 for heterosexuals. The trends for earlier but
fewer children for bisexuals just cancel out, giving them the same
overall rate of reproduction as heterosexuals.
As briefly mentioned above, part of the reason that bisexuals
often end up with fewer children despite an earlier start than
heterosexuals is that, like the woman in the scene, their reproductive life can be curtailed through disease. Just like male
bisexuals, females are at greater risk of contracting sexually
transmitted diseases. By the age of twenty, they are more likely to
have experienced genital infections. By the age of twenty-five
they are more likely to exhibit abnormal cells in cervical smear
tests, and by thirty they are more likely to have cervical cancer.
To what extent this increased risk of disease is a direct result of
bisexual activity is not known. Sexually transmitted diseases,
such as herpes and genital warts, can be passed directly from
woman to woman during love-making. But there are other aspects
of female bisexuality which could also increase the risk of
infection, as we shall soon see.
The fact that female bisexuality is less common than male
suggests to an evolutionary biologist either that women have less
to gain from bisexuality than men or that they have more to lose
— or both. However, it is unlikely that bisexual women have
more to lose - quite the opposite, in fact. For example, not only do
male bisexuals seem much more likely to be at risk to disease,
they are much more at risk to violence from homophobes than are
female bisexuals. This is probably because lesbians are much less
of a reproductive threat to heterosexual women than are gays to
heterosexual men.
The conclusion, therefore, is that if women do not have more to
lose from bisexuality than men, they must have less to gain — and
this should not be so surprising. We have already seen that males
have a lot more to learn about sexual technique during early
adolescence than females (Scenes 27 to 30). Homosexual
experience at the appropriate time can confer precocious sexual
competence on both sexes, but does so much more clearly on
males. In fact, given that females have fewer basic sexual
techniques to learn than males during adolescence (Scene 27), we
have to ask what it is about sexual experience with other women
that gives bisexuals such an early advantage over heterosexuals.
The main things that a woman has to learn about sex are those
techniques that allow her to get the most out of long-term
relationships (Scene 18). In particular she needs to learn the
techniques of infidelity and deception. She also needs to learn how
to make the most of her orgasms in a way that will give her the
greatest control over sperm retention and warfare (Scene 26).
The elements of deception needed to exploit infidelity are
292 293SPERM WARS
probably better practised with another woman than with a man.
Moreover, they are best practised within the context of a
relatively long-term monogamous relationship with a woman —
which is one of the key features of female homosexual behaviour.
If a woman can fool a long-term female partner over infidelity,
faked orgasms and the like, then she should find it relatively easy
to fool a similar male partner. This allows her to exploit the
advantages of infidelity and sperm warfare (Scenes 21 and 26)
while reducing the risk of having to pay the costs (Scenes 9 and
11).
If bisexual women learn earlier and better how to exploit
relationships and how to promote and influence sperm warfare, it
should not be surprising to find that they make earlier and greater
use of these abilities. Bisexual women are inseminated just as
many times over their lifetime by a man as are heterosexual
women. Moreover, bisexual women are more likely to have more
than one concurrent male partner, and to have sex with two
different men in a short enough period of time to promote sperm
warfare.
Not only do bisexual women promote sperm warfare more
often, they seem better able (though the finer details have not
been measured) to control sperm retention and thus the outcome
of that warfare. They are more likely to masturbate, and to
masturbate more often, than heterosexual women. They thus
create stronger cervical filters (Scene 22). When they do have sex
with a man, bisexuals are no more nor less likely to have an
orgasm. But they are more likely to have a bypass orgasm (Scene
25), negating the effect of their cervical filter.
Because many of the orgasm responses that are a woman's
greatest weapon in sperm warfare actually occur in the absence of
men anyway (masturbatory; nocturnal — Scenes 22 to 26), they
can easily be practised in the context of a lesbian relationship —
including even those orgasms that in a heterosexual relationship
normally occur before, during or after penetration. This is
because the stimuli women give each other during lesbian sex are
very similar to those given by a man during foreplay. The
294
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
most common technique used by lesbians is the stroking and
managing of the genitals, particularly the clitoris. After that, in
decreasing order of frequency, come the stroking and massaging of
the breasts, the licking and sucking of nipples, oral sex, and the
pressing and rubbing together of the genitals. In societies such as
some in Melanesia, lesbians only ever use their mouths and hands
during sex. Elsewhere, objects are sometimes used, either to
stimulate the clitoris or to insert in the vagina. These range from
reindeer calf muscle in parts of Siberia to bananas, sweet potatoes,
and elegant carved wooden phalluses in other parts of the world. In
the more industrialised societies, of course, commercially
available vibrators and dildoes are sometimes used. However,
penetration either by fingers or objects is still a relatively
infrequent part of lesbian stimulation. In one American survey,
only 3 per cent of lesbians said that they regularly used penetration
to stimulate their partner during sex.
The orgasm 'success rate' is about twice as great if a woman is
stimulated by another woman rather than by a man. Moreover, the
orgasms women give each other are much more likely to occur
during the fertile phase of their cycle. The peak of sexual activity
that we witnessed right at the beginning of Scene 31 took place a
week after the women had finished their periods. If they were
going to ovulate that month (and they might not —Scene15) it
would be within the next few days. They were both in their fertile
phase.
Interestingly, this peak of orgasm frequency during the fertile
phase of a lesbian's menstrual cycle is mirrored by peaks of
homosexual activity by other female animals at a similar phase of
their cycle. Whether we study cows, rats or guinea-pigs, we find
that females are much more likely to mount each other during their
fertile phase. It has been shown experimentally that such mounting
behaviour is hormone-linked, so that changing the hormone
balance during menstrual cycle alters the timing of mounting, and
can even stop it altogether. Lesbians who take oral contraceptives
lose their peak of mid-cycle orgasm activity. This suggests that,
like
295SPERM WARS
the other animals described above, a lesbian's motivation to have
orgasms with her partner is also under hormonal rather than
cerebral control.
Our final picture of the homosexual behaviour of women, then,
shows a process of practising with women for success at getting
the most out of longer-term relationships with individual men.
This is not really any different from our conclusion for the
advantage of bisexuality to men. Bisexual men, however, are
practising primarily for success with many women. Unlike a man,
a woman cannot increase her reproductive success simply by
having more sex with more men. She does so, instead, by being
much more selective and strategic and by thus making the most of
exploiting the men around her. In this, a bisexual woman is aided
by a precocious ability to promote and manipulate sperm warfare
and by a longer-term ability to make better use of infidelity. Just
as for male bisexuals, however, the reproductive strategy of
female bisexuals brings with it increased risks that can result in an
early curtailment of their reproductive activity through disease or
early death. The net result, therefore, is that female bisexuals and
heterosexuals have similar reproductive success — but achieve it
by different means.
There is one last feature of interest in Scene 31 that we have
not yet discussed. When women live together, they often
synchronise their periods. Not only lesbians, but mothers and
daughters, nuns, prisoners, nurses and students also often
synchronise when they live together. In a fascinating series of
experiments carried out in the USA in the early 1980s, each
woman in a group of volunteers agreed to have the underarm
secretions from another woman rubbed under her nose every
other day for a few months. Each woman who received the
secretion adjusted her menstrual cycle to synchronise with that
of the woman who had provided it — which implies that
chemicals are present in a woman's underarm secretions which
enable groups who spend a lot of time together to synchronise
their menstrual cycles.
In recent years, there has been a lot of discussion over
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
whether menstrual synchrony is a real phenomenon. The most
recent research suggests that it is — but that so too is
desynchrony. In some groups of women, the menstrual cycles
become more similar, in others, more different. Which direction is
taken by any particular group is not due to chance, but depends
more than anything on how many of the women in the group are
ovulating regularly (Scene 15). Groups in which few are
ovulating, particularly if some are on the pill, lend to synchronise.
Groups in which most are ovulating tend to desynchronise. It is as
if the women's bodies are trying to ovulate as many days apart
from each other as possible.
Just why these responses should exist is still a mystery, but It
probably has something to do with hiding the fertile phase from
men (Scene 2). If a group of women all ovulated at the same time,
even the most unaware of males might notice the behavioural
changes associated with the fertile phase (Scenes 1, 6, 10 and 22).
In isolation, an individual can more easily hide these changes
from her partner amidst random swings in mood and behaviour.
The fact that the two women in Scene 31 were synchronised
suggests that they had not ovulated in recent months. This is a
common response to the absence of men (Scene 15). With the
beginning of the younger girl's heterosexual activity, we should
expect her first to ovulate, then to desynchronise her cycle from
her female lover.
296 297SPERM WARS ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
SCENE 32
The Tenth Tonight
The doorbell rang. It was uncanny the way she could tell
something about the person at the door just from the way he rang
the bell. The previous ring had been aggressive and persistent, but
this one had a tentativeness about it. She got up off the bed and
pulled on her bath robe over her underwear. Young, she thought
to herself — or a vicar.
On her way down the stairs, she did some quick mental
arithmetic. It had been a busy night. This would be the tenth —
maybe she should also make it the last.
When she saw him standing there, she smiled to herself — he
was young, not a vicar. And he looked distinctly uncomfortable.
Diffidently, he asked her how much. She told him, then pointed
out that it was more if he didn't want to use a condom. Taken
aback partly by the price and partly by her appearance, he
hesitated, then agreed. She stood back to let him in, told him to go
on up, and closed the door. Before following him, she took her
'Model - first floor' notice out of the window.
Once in the room, she asked him which it was to be, condom
or no condom. He said it would have to be with a condom
because he didn't have enough money to pay for it without.
'Money first,' she told him.
The youth looked very nervous. To settle him she told him her
name, or rather a name, and asked for his. He told her his family
name. Despite herself, she laughed. She asked him if he was in
the army. Embarrassed, he explained he was a student, that he had
only just left school and couldn't get out of the habit of giving his
family name when asked. She told him to relax, then asked if it
was his first time. When he said it
298
she asked if it was his first time ever or just the first time he'd paid
for it. It was the first time he had paid and might be the first time
ever, he said. He wasn't sure. He had got close a couple of times
but didn't know if he really had or not.
She didn't ask him to elaborate — just told him to relax and leave
it to her. Then she took off her bath robe and knickers, lay down
on the bed, and told him to take off his trousers and pants and join
her. She didn't react at all when she saw that his penis was limp
and small, as if it had been hiding under his clothes. With
difficulty, she put a condom on him, then did her best to encourage
an erection. It was many minutes before she felt any reaction on
his part, despite her soothing talk and practised hand. Then just as
he began to stiffen and she thought she might be able to help him
after all, he ejaculated, long before she could try to put him inside
her. His look of dejection and embarrassment touched her. She
told him not to worry and, as he hurriedly dressed to leave the
scene of such humiliation, tried to reassure him that he would be
fine next time. It was just nerves. She saw it happen all the time,
she said.
After he had gone, she dressed. As she reckoned up her night's
earnings, five with a condom and five without, the thought crossed
her mind that maybe she should become a sex therapist when she
retired. A few minutes later she was walking out of her front door
and on to the street. Hailing a taxi, she set off for home.
As she watched the familiar route unfurl, her thoughts drifted buck
to the student and she marvelled at the way education seemed to
slow down a person's sexual development. Not that being a student
had hindered her. In fact, it was when she was at college, about
fifteen years ago, that she had started on her career. Nobody could
deny it had been profitable, even if it hadn't been the career she had
envisaged when she left home. Short of money, as were many of her
fellow students, she had exploited her looks and joined an escort
agency. Tempted by the financial offers she received, she had
begun to spend the occasional night with those clients she found
most attractive. By
299SPERM WARS
the time she graduated, she was earning so much money from sex,
had accumulated such a large clientele of her own and, frankly,
was enjoying herself so much that she saw no point in embarking
on any other career.
At one time or another during her fifteen years she had
exploited just about every avenue by which an attractive girl could
make money from sex. A chance encounter gave her a brief spell
making hard-core pornographic films. In the main, it had been fun.
She laughed to herself as she remembered the contortions
necessary, amidst a dozen naked men, to get a penis in both hands
and all three orifices and still leave room for a camera. Even so,
when a rich politician from among her clients decided he wanted
exclusive access and set her up in an expensive flat in the heart of
the city, she had retired from her film career to become a
professional mistress. She didn't entirely give up having sex with
other men, but pretended she had — and got away with it.
Eventually, the politician's sex life had been exposed by a tabloid
newspaper and she moved on — this time to a judge.
After the judge died, conversations with some of her fellow
professionals led her into trying the streets for a while. In many
ways, she had enjoyed her time on the streets more than any other
phase of her career. It had certainly paid well. Eventually,
however, she gave it up. After a few close shaves, a bad
experience with a particularly violent customer had put her in
hospital for a few days. After that, she had moved into the relative
security of a bordello, which she also enjoyed. She only left when
her looks began to fade and she could no longer compete in open
parade with the younger girls. At least with her 'Model - first floor'
method of recruitment, men had already half committed
themselves by the time she opened the door. Anyway, she was still
attractive enough for most to accept her price rather than walk
away when they saw her.
She was going to retire soon. She knew she had been lucky and
that she should quit while she was winning. Despite several
thousand sexual partners in her lifetime, she had only had three
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
bouts of disease and all had cleared up quickly with the help of
antibiotics. She had been beaten up a few times, but no serious
damage had been done. Most importantly, though, she had
managed to avoid the drugs that had been, and still were, the
ruination of so many of her fellow prostitutes. For all these years
she had been making as much money each night as most people
make in a week, or even a month. There had been overheads, of
course — protectors to pay and places to rent. But even so, she
could have retired years ago and still have lived comfortably off
the interest from her savings. And the reason she hadn't retired was
simply that she enjoyed her job too much. She would be loath to
leave it all behind. In fact, she was seriously considering starting
her own escort agency or bordello when she did eventually decide it
was time to stop.
The taxi pulled up outside her home — a large detached house on
the outskirts of town. Her partner shouted from the kitchen that it
was good timing — the dinner was nearly ready and the children
were already in bed. She went upstairs, douched herself, then had a
bath. While she lay back in the warm water, her partner brought
her a glass of wine, then went back downstairs to finish the cooking.
Before going down to join him, she looked in on her four children,
each in their own bedroom. It would be interesting to know who
their fathers were. She liked to think that the two daughters, now
ten and eight, were fathered by the politician and the judge, but she
couldn't be certain. Her elder son was conceived while she was in
the bordello, and could be anybody's. Many of the clients were
men of wealth and status and there were several she wouldn't have
minded being his father. Her younger son should be her partner's.
She gave up working for a while specifically to conceive his child,
but she became pregnant so quickly they still couldn't be entirely
certain he was the father.
Her partner was five years younger than her. An ex-student and
an ex-client, he had volunteered to look after the children
in exchange for his keep and sexual access. They had been together
now for five years.
300 301SPERM WARS
After the meal the couple drank, and talked. For the first time
that week, they had sex before going to bed.
iologically, a prostitute is an individual who offers other
individuals sexual access in exchange for one or more
resources. In humans, the resource sought and offered is usually
money, but it might just as well be food, shelter or protection.
Nowhere is sperm warfare more rife than in the reproductive tract
of active female prostitutes. By the end of a night's work, the
number of sperm armies waging war inside a prostitute's body
often runs into double figures. And, from time to time, the winner
of that war claims the prize of fertilisation.
Prostitutes reproduce. Often, like the woman in the scene, they
reproduce very successfully. Why do some women abandon
fidelity, or secret infidelity, and openly pursue their reproductive
success via prostitution? When they do, how does their
reproductive success compare with that of women who pursue
more conventional strategies?
Female prostitutes have been, and are, an almost universal
feature of human societies. Anthropologically, only 4 per cent of
societies claim not to contain any. The remainder acknowledge
their presence. It is difficult, though, even in these societies, to
estimate what proportion of women engage in prostitution at some
time during their lives. Estimates of the number of overt
prostitutes active at any one time range from less than 1 per cent
of women in Britain in the late 1980s to about 25 per cent of
women in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, in 1974. Such estimates,
however, are unreliable and are probably underestimates. More
women than this will sometimes engage in prostitution.
Part of the problem lies in the lack of a precise definition.
Overt, promiscuous sex in exchange for money is, in many ways,
simply the least ambiguous exchange of sexual access for
resources or 'gifts'. Throughout human history and culture, there
are examples of men giving the woman (or her family) a 'gift'
around the time of their first intercourse, without the
302
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
woman being categorised as a prostitute. Often the exchange is
ritualised, as during marriage ceremonies. Even on the wedding
night, money may be demanded by the woman or her family
before intercourse is allowed to take place.
Clearly, there are degrees of prostitution. In principle it is
difficult to know where to draw the line between a traditional
prostitute exchanging insemination for money and a woman in a
long-term partnership exchanging insemination for support,
protection and 'gifts'. The woman in this scene is clearly a
prostitute, but what about the woman in Scene 18?
It is similarly difficult to decide for other animals just what is
prostitution and what is not. At one extreme, there are clear acts of
prostitution — like the female empid fly who trades sex for food.
For a male empid to be given the opportunity of mating, he first
has to find a swarm of gnats, catch one, wrap It In silk from his
salivary glands, then find a waiting female and offer it to her.
While she unwraps and then eats her meal, he is allowed to mate.
The larger the gift, the longer it takes her to feed, the longer the
male is allowed to mate, the more sperm he transfers, and the
more eggs he fertilises. Once he has gone, the male waits for the
next male to bring her food and to mate. In some species, females
are so successful as prostitutes that they never need to find food
themselves.
Migratory birds occupy a position at the other extreme of the
prostitution scale. Males return to the breeding areas first and
compete for the best territories — those in which they and a
female can most successfully raise their young. Females arrive
later and inspect the different territories and the males who defend
them. Each female then makes her choice of the best compromise
(Scene 18) between territory quality, male quality and availability
(because the best territories and males are quickly snapped up by
the earliest females). Eventually, a female will allow a particular
male to have sex with her. In lunge she is allowed to share his
territory. If the male is ousted by another, the female does not
leave with her former partner, but allows the new male to mate
with her in exchange
303
BSPERM WARS
for being permitted to carry on living in what is now his territory,
The female is intent on living in a particular territory and is
prepared to mate with any male who successfully lays claim to
that territory in order to do so. In principle, this is still prostitution
— the trading of sex for resources — even though it is taking
place within a monogamous relationship. As such it is little
different from the behaviour of the majority of women around the
world, few of whom would consider themselves to be prostitutes.
Men, also, of course can prostitute themselves. The young
gardener in Scene 18 is an example. In most circumstances,
however, it is much more difficult for a man to find a woman who
is prepared to pay, in whatever sense, for sexual access to his
body. Most men are only too willing to have sex with a woman
without any reward other than the sexual opportunity itself. In
contrast, for all the reasons we have discussed in this book (see
particularly Scene 28), women have much more to lose from any
single sexual encounter than men and usually need some sort of
pay-off to balance the potential cost. Only when a woman is eager
to collect a particular man's genes might she be prepared to pay in
some way for the privilege.
However we define prostitution, though, the woman in Scene
32 is clearly at the 'empid fly' end of the scale we have just
described rather than the 'bird' end. For her, prostitution is a way
of life. Biologically, it is also a strategy for reproduction — and,
moreover, a highly successful one. By her mid-thirties she had
had four children and had earned more than enough money to
give them a comfortable and healthy environment in which to
live. Each child had a different father, at least two of whom could
have been men of status. What all of the fathers had in common
was that they produced very competitive ejaculates: sperm armies
able to defeat those of many other men. The woman's sons, her
grandsons, and any later male descendants should also have an
above-average chance of producing competitive ejaculates. In
later generations, many people in the population
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
would inherit her genes because of the competitive success of her
male descendants.
This advantage of prostitution as a reproductive strategy is the
same advantage gained by any woman who promotes wholesale
sperm warfare in her tract (Scene 21). It is just that prostitutes
exploit this technique more often than any other category of
women in the population. Few other women, except those who
suffer gang rape (Scene 34) or who seek out group sex (Scene 21),
are ever likely to contain the sperm from as many different men at
the same time.
The success of prostitution as a reproductive strategy means
that most of us will contain the genes of a prostitute among our
ancestors. On average, we should each need to go back through
our family tree no further than the 1820s (seven generations)
before finding an ancestor who was born to a prostitute (assuming,
conservatively, that only 1 per cent of the population is conceived
by overt prostitutes).
As a way of life, however, prostitution has many risks. First and
foremost, as we have discussed on numerous occasions, there is a
high risk of contracting sexually transmitted disease. This factor
alone can condemn a prostitute to early infertility and death. Many
try to reduce the danger by using condoms but are forever fighting
against male aversion (presumably for reasons discussed in Scene
29). Prostitutes report men trying surreptitiously to remove the
condom that they have agreed to wear. Even since the advent of
AIDS, the majority of clients prefer not to use a condom. So
strong is the male body's preference for insemination that, like the
woman in Scene 32, many prostitutes are prepared to settle for
simply exploiting the situation by charging more for intercourse
without a condom.
There is also the danger of being injured or killed by a client.
Prostitutes attempt to reduce this risk by gathering together in a
brothel or massage parlour, by paying a man or men to watch over
them and provide protection, or simply by having a chaperon
(often their mother or father). By far the biggest danger to
prostitutes, however, is drug
304 305SPERM WARS
addiction — a danger both physically and financially. Despite
sometimes having to pay rent on the room from which they work,
or for protection, prostitutes have an earning capacity that most
other people can only fantasise about. Yet few prostitutes are rich.
In part, this is as a result of exploitation: young girls are first
introduced to the drug scene and then 'encouraged' into prostitution
as the only means of earning enough money to support their habit.
The agents then take their own commission for providing
'protection'. Such sad cases inevitably incur the costs of prostitution
without reaping the benefits.
Not only is prostitution a reproductive strategy for women, the
visiting of prostitutes is also a reproductive strategy for men. In
ancient Greece and Rome, almost all men inseminated a prostitute
at some time in their lives. In the USA in the 1940s, 69 per cent
had inseminated a prostitute at least once and 15 per cent did so on
a regular basis. In the UK in the 1990s, 10 per cent of men between
forty-five and fifty-nine years old have paid for sex at least once in
their lives. Apart from the occasional priest, the average man who
pays for sex usually has other reproductive outlets — in the UK,
for example, they are also more likely to have an above-average
number of unpaid partners.
As a reproductive option for men, prostitutes provide a target for
insemination that is quick and easy. The more prostitutes a man
inseminates, the greater his potential reproductive success. He may
also gain in other ways, depending on his situation. For example,
the young student in Scene 32 was hoping to gain experience
(Scene 27) that would later be of use in his more conventional
reproductive attempts with other women (on average, students lag
two years behind other people in their sexual experiences). Men
without a partner are simply including prostitutes in their search for
females to inseminate. Occasionally, a man may find a long-term
partner through his contact with prostitutes, like the woman's
partner in Scene 32. Men already with a partner are using
prostitutes as targets for their infidelity.
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
Prostitutes are also potentially expensive, both financially and In
terms of disease risk. Thus, although insemination is easy, as we
have just seen, the reproductive benefits are relatively low. Any
single ejaculate has a low chance of achieving fertilisation because
of the intensive sperm warfare that it will encounter. In addition,
even during long periods of unprotected sex, prostitutes are less
likely to conceive in any given month than a woman who is having
only occasional sex with a single partner. This could be due to
prostitutes having a lower rate of ovulation (Scene 16) or a more
efficient cervical filter (Scene 22). It could also be due to sperm
warfare. Perhaps such warfare is so intensive inside prostitutes that
the sperm armies from different men often neutralise each other.
A man needs to inseminate prostitutes many, many more times
than he does a conventional mistress in order to produce a single
child outside of his long-term partnership. Of course, no man
would say that his reason for visiting a prostitute is to gain a
chance of fathering a child. Nevertheless, from time CO time a
man will succeed in this, passing on to his child in the process the
genetic program that made his ejaculate so successful at sperm
warfare — prostitutes are unsuitable targets for men who are not
sperm war specialists (Scenes 19, 30, and 35).
The final conundrum is why some men are prepared to form
long-term partnerships with prostitutes. Clearly, such a man
experiences all of the disadvantages just discussed for a prostitute's
clients. Usually, however, he trades these costs against the benefit
of a share in her wealth. The man in Scene 32 traded his financial
and lifestyle benefit for effectively looking after her, her home and
her children. In addition, he had some opportunity to father a child
with her and may already have done so. His lifestyle probably also
meant that he would have a chance to inseminate other women as
well. His reproductive strategy was risky. The potential gains were
high, but so too were the potential costs. Apart from any other
genetic characteristic he needed to benefit from such a strategy, at
the very least it
306 307SPERM WARS
would have helped if he had also been a sperm war specialist
(Scene 35).
Given that prostitution and the use of prostitutes are both
reproductive strategies with high potential benefits and
considerable potential risks, prostitutes share many similarities
with bisexuals (Scenes 30 and 31). We do not know whether there
is a genetic predisposition for prostitution in the same way as there
is for bisexuality, but if there is, it would seem that only a minority
of women possess the genes for prostitution. So it is possible that,
as we concluded for bisexuality, prostitution is an advantageous
strategy only as long as it remains relatively uncommon, at least in
societies in which its costs are high. If all females were available to
all men, the potential value of prostitution and the reproductive
edge it would give each prostitute over other females would
disappear. At the same time, the spread of disease would greatly
increase.
If this 'genetic minority' interpretation of prostitution is
correct, the corollary, as for bisexuality, is that on average the
reproductive success of prostitutes and other women should be the
same. Without a genetic analysis similar to that which has been
carried out for bisexuals, however, we cannot be certain — and
there is an alternative interpretation. This is that all women are
potential prostitutes — but that only a few ever encounter a
situation in which they judge the potential benefits to outweigh the
potential costs. If this interpretation is correct, the corollary is that
women who judge the situation correctly and become prostitutes
should have a higher level of reproductive success than other
women.
This interpretation has less in common with our interpretation
of bisexuality (Scenes 30 and 31) than it has with our interpretation
of another high-risk, minority sexual strategy —rape. This is the
subject of the next two scenes.
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
SCENE 33
The Predator
The man locked his car, then made his way along the dark road.
As he walked, he could hear the sound of traffic a block away on the
main road running through the town. It was midnight but still hot,
and the pavement cafes and bars around the busy main square were
still crowded and noisy, mainly with holidaymakers. Turning away
from the square, he saw at the end of a narrow road the beacon he
was seeking. It was a telephone booth, shining out of the darkness
of a marble-tiled square outside a church.
He phoned home, checked with his partner that she and their two
children were well, and told her he would see her the following
night. With that, he walked a short way back down the road,
stepped into the darkest of shadows, and leaned back against cool
wall of the church. After checking the flick-knife in his back pocket,
he lit up a cigarette and settled back to wait. Apart from the glow of
the cigarette, he was totally invisible. His throat dried and tightened
in a mixture of excitement, fear and anticipation. The waiting was
the part he liked best.
The girl at the pavement bar was crying. The anger had gone but
the pain and worry were still there. Two tables away, laughing
drunkenly with his friends, was this holiday's sexual partner. As
she sat with her friends, she could feel the flowback dampening her
knickers. Scarcely more than an hour ago, they had had sex on the
grass in the nearby park.
She wasn't on the pill. All week, since they first met, he had
used a condom. Tonight, he had only pretended to put one on. As
if that hadn't been cruel enough, no sooner had he withdrawn than
he had gloated that she was the second that
308
309SPERM WARS
night — that an hour earlier he had been in the same spot with
another of the girls from their group. He always liked to have
more than one girl each holiday, he boasted, and if she really
wanted to know, he much preferred the other girl, anyway. But he
didn't mind carrying on having sex with her for the rest of the
holiday, if she wanted.
After insulting him to the limits of her vocabulary, she had
made her way drunkenly back to the bar to seek the sympathy of
her friends. Now, after the anger and the tears, she had the sudden
urge to speak to her boyfriend at home and to seek the reassurance
that at least he still cared for her. Clumsily, she stood up, her chair
falling over on to the pavement. She told her friends she was
going to the phone. Her best friend offered to come with her, but
she said she wanted to be on her own.
The man had been leaning against the wall in the shadows for
about fifteen minutes and was smoking his second cigarette when
he saw the girl appear at the end of the road. In all that time, only
one couple had come to the phone and the church square was now
empty. He waited, fully expecting someone to be with the girl.
But no, she was on her own. His luck was in, yet again. For a few
moments, she was back-lit by the lights from the main square and
he could see the silhouette of hips and legs through her thin dress.
Then she was in shadow and he heard, rather than saw, her
coming towards him. He took one last drag on his cigarette and
threw it away. His penis sensed action — beginning to stiffen into
the rod of iron that hadn't once let him down. This girl would be
his fifth this summer. He reached into the back pocket of his
trousers for the knife.
The girl had noticed the glow of a cigarette in the shadows but
was too drunk and too angry to sense danger. She barely noticed the
man as she passed him in the blackness, but a second later she was
grabbed from behind, a strong arm around her throat. The knife in
front of her face was silhouetted against the light of the distant
telephone kiosk. As he held her, she glimpsed a group of people
walking past the end of one of the other roads
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
leading away from the church. She wanted to scream, but fear of
the knife, the man's arm around her throat, and blind panic left her
totally mute.
From that first moment, everything seemed to happen at the speed
of light. Still standing behind her, the man pressed the cold metal
against her cheek and ear. Speaking softly, in a language she didn't
understand, he moved his arm from her throat to her waist and
made her bend forward, as if to touch her toes. He lifted her dress
forward over her head, placed his knife in her knickers and, with
two quick, practised cuts, removed them. Within seconds of
making her spread her legs, he was inside her. Fifty thrusts later,
he ejaculated. For a few seconds, he paused before withdrawing
and for one panic-stricken moment she thought he was going to kill
her. But he pushed her to the ground and ran off into the darkness.
Within a minute he was back in his car, driving to his hotel, two
towns away.
The girl lay sprawled on the ground in shock for several
minutes. Then came the tears. Eventually, she got up and moved
off, a sad, dishevelled figure. She saw no one. Back in her hot,
humid hotel room, she took off her clothes, stepped into the
shower, and stayed there for nearly an hour, washing and washing
herself. She fell on to the bed and spent the night half in shock,
half in sleep.
Inside her body, a sperm war raged between the armies from her
holiday lover and the rapist, while her right ovary made
preparations for ovulation. Two days later, while she was still
agonising over whether to tell her friends or the police, she
conceived. The war was over.
Daunted by the prospect of explaining what had happened to
police who did not speak her language, and worried by how her
boyfriend might react if he ever found out, she told no one about
the rape. A week later, back in her own country with her
boyfriend, she contrived on their first night together to have
unprotected sex.
On discovering her pregnancy, she first considered an abortion,
but with her boyfriend's reassurances that he would help
310 311SPERM WARS
raise what he thought was their child, she decided to keep it By
the time her baby was born, she had managed to convince herself
that it was probably his anyway. But it wasn't. Her son's father
was in fact a predatory rapist from a distant country.
iologists are rarely less popular than when they offer an
objective analysis of rape. If they say that rape yields
reproductive benefits, they are accused of encouraging the act. If
they conclude that rape has a biological basis, they are accused of
condoning it. If they dare to suggest that female behaviour may
sometimes invite rape, they are accused of violating womankind
just as surely as if they had committed the act themselves. Yet to
report proper conclusions is not automatically to encourage,
condone or violate. Are historians accused of encouraging warfare
if they conclude that a country benefited from a war? Are they
accused of condoning warfare if they conclude the behaviour has a
biological basis? Are they accused of violation if they conclude
that a country invited invasion? Or are they, on the other hand,
congratulated for incisive historical analysis and for aiding the
prevention of future conflicts ?
Prevention of socially unacceptable behaviour, be it rape or
warfare, demands a proper understanding of the circumstances
that trigger such behaviour. If the objective conclusion is that
under certain circumstances all men will rape or all countries will
go to war, there is no value in wishing or pretending that men or
nation states are somehow different. The value will lie instead in
identifying the circumstances that facilitate rape or war. Then,
some attempt can be made to ensure that those circumstances
rarely, if ever, occur. The only reliable pathway to understanding
the situation is via objective analysis, even if en route some
conclusions may be unpleasant, unpalatable or socially 'incorrect'.
The first step is to be clear about the phenomenon that we are
about to discuss. The rape in this scene was a sexual event
312
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
Which had a reproductive outcome. The girl was violated, but
Hot physically damaged, and was left able to conceive and give
birth. The rapist's weapon — in this case a flick-knife — was
used as a means of coercion, not to inflict physical damage. This
is the commonest scenario. As testament to the reproductive
nature of their behaviour, such rapists usually select victims who
are at their peak of fertility, aged between twenty and thirty-five.
On such occasions, the bodies of the men concerned are
clearly using rape as a reproductive strategy. On a minority of
occasions, however — albeit those which receive the widest
publicity — a woman is not only raped but is also physically
harmed, mutilated or killed. On these occasions the men
concerned are bent on violence and murder, not reproduction. As
testament to the non-reproductive nature of their behaviour, such
rapists are more likely to select older women, from their late
thirties onwards — women who are past their peak of fertility.
These latter, more violent events are not part of our discussion.
Here we are concerned solely with sexual events in which the
woman is not physically harmed by the rapist, at least not so
much that she is unable to conceive from the intercourse or later
give birth (though she may suffer psycho-logical consequences).
On these, the majority of occasions, the reproductive success of
both the rapist and the victim is influenced by their interaction.
Moreover, such rape often involves sperm warfare. This
relationship between rape, sperm warfare and reproductive
success is an essential and proper topic for consideration in this
book.
We have to ask whether rape can be a successful alternative
strategy in the male pursuit of reproductive success. And,
unpalatable as the question may be, we also have to ask whether
conceiving via a rapist attack can be an alternative strategy for
the female body, as well. Anthropologically, rape of the type
described in Scene 33 is common in nearly 50 per cent of
societies and is reportedly rare in only 20 per cent. It is estimated
that in some of the world's major industrial cities nearly half of
women experience an attempted rape in their
BSPERM WARS
lifetime, and a quarter are actually raped. Such estimates are, of
course, very approximate and confounded not least by the fact
that, as in our scene, very few rapes are actually reported. The
current estimate is that only about one rape in ten is made known
to the authorities. So widespread is rape and so often do children
result from rape that all of us could probably find a rapist among
the past five generations of our ancestors.
Humans are by no means the only animal in which rape is part
of the male sexual repertoire. The males of species as diverse as
insects, ducks and monkeys are all known to force copulation
under certain circumstances.
At least one insect, the male scorpion fly, has a special hook on
its wing which it uses to grip the female while it forces
copulation. Without that hook — for instance, if it is removed by
an experimental biologist — the female always escapes a male's
attempt at force. All males in this species have a hook, but not all
males need to use it. Females are attracted to the bigger males and
allow them to mate without being forced. Rapists in this species
are the smallest males, unattractive to females, who cannot obtain
a mate in any other way. Even so, they are relatively unsuccessful
and are lucky to force a mating more than once in their whole
lives. In contrast, the largest males have females queuing up for
their unforced favours. In this insect, therefore, rapists are males
making the best of a bad job, having been born small and
relatively unattractive to females. This is not the case for most
animals.
More often than not, rape is an extra option for males who are
in all other respects reproductively normal and attractive. Among
white-throated bee-eaters (a species of bird), for example, the
rapists are individuals who, having managed to breed early in the
season and having raised young with a monogamous partner, later
embark on raping forays. They chase any female who is still
fertile and who has been left unguarded by her mate, and attempt
to force insemination. Sometimes such females offer resistance.
At other times, like the girl in Scene 33, they may simply allow
the male to mate.
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
However the female birds behave, the outcome is the same. Not
only do rapists produce young with their partner, they also
produce a few through forcing copulation on other females. The
result is that, on average, rapists of this species have a greater
reproductive success than non-rapists.
As we shall soon see, it is crucial for our understanding of
human rape, particularly the response of the female, to know
whether rapists have an above — or below-average reproductive
success. Are human rapists more like the scorpion fly, or the
white-throated bee-eater? Are they reproductively below
average — making the best of a bad job after a lack of success
via more conventional strategies? Or are they above average —
adding their success via rape to an average success achieved
more conventionally?
Unfortunately, the evidence is a little ambiguous. There have
been a few, albeit rather weak, claims that rapists are, in fact,
like the scorpion fly, making the best of a bad job. Such
studies describe the average rapist as young, poor, and physically
unattractive to women. Other much more thorough studies have
shown that age for age, social status for social status, and
physical attractiveness for physical attractiveness, rapist are no
less likely than non-rapists to have a partner and children. If we
believe these latter studies, it would seem that on balance human
rapists, like white-throated bee-eater rapists, have the potential
for an above-average reproductive success. Whether they realise
that potential, however, depends on whether they succeed in
making the potential reproductive advantages outweigh the
potential costs. Like the other minority strategies discussed in
this section (bisexuality, prostitution), rape is a risky business.
Not only is there the ever-present possibility of infection, there is
also a real danger that rape will trigger strong and often violent
retribution.
First, there is some risk that rapists will be injured or even
killed by the victim herself — though, as in the scene, females
do not always resist. Secondly and more importantly, they are at
risk to retribution both from their victim's partner and from the
314 315SPERM WARS
society in general. Men do not stand idly by and watch their or
other men's partners being raped if they can prevent the attack.
Vigilante groups against rapists are by no means uncommon,
particularly in large cities. Nor are humans alone in showing such
defensive behaviour. The male members of a lion pride, for
example, will band together to repel attacks from marauding
gangs of bachelor males intent on gaining sexual access to the
females. Injuries, sometimes fatal, are commonplace.
In most modern human cultures, however, most of the
defence against rapists is institutionalised. Incarceration rather
than violence, injury or early death is a rapist's destiny if he is
ever caught.
Rape is clearly a dangerous reproductive strategy. It can be
very successful but it can also be a complete failure. As a result,
the successful rapists amongst our ancestors, those who left most
children and thus whose genes we are now most likely to possess,
were those who were the best judges of circumstances; those who
most accurately assessed (subconsciously) whether the potential
reproductive benefits of an opportunity to rape really outweighed
the potential costs.
So far, we have looked at rape as a reproductive strategy for
men. When we consider women and their physiological response
to being raped, we encounter an unpalatable conundrum.
Theoretically, if being raped is reproductively disadvantageous
to a woman, she should be less likely to conceive from it than
from routine intercourse. On the other hand, if being raped is
advantageous, she should be more likely to conceive from it than
from routine intercourse. So what happens? Are women more
likely, or less likely, to conceive via a rapist?
All of the available evidence points in the same direction. It
suggests that, like the girl in Scene 33, a woman is more likely to
conceive from rape than from routine sex with her partner. It is
just possible that this conclusion is false, the data reflecting
instead a greater probability that a woman will report rape if she
is likely to conceive. But this is unlikely for two reasons. First,
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
a woman has to report a rape long before she knows whether she
has conceived. Secondly, the difference in conception rate
between rape and routine sex is greatest during the least fertile
phases of the menstrual cycle — during menstruation and again
three or more weeks after menstruation. These are precisely the
times that a woman would least expect to conceive.
However reluctantly, therefore, we should accept that a woman
is more likely to conceive from rape than from routine sex. The
most plausible explanation is that the trauma of rape actually
stimulates ovulation, especially if her body happens to be 'on
hold' (Scene 15). We have already seen that rather violent roughand-tumble sex play can trigger ovulation in mink (Scene 28).
However, trauma may not be the only factor. Although a
woman is more likely to conceive from rape than she is from
routine intercourse with her partner, there are other, less
traumatic, situations in which she is equally likely to conceive.
One is when she has sex with a partner whom she has not seen for
a long time and whom she sees only briefly — as when a soldier
comes home on a short leave (Scene 15). Another is during
snatched moments of infidelity (Scenes 6, 17 and 19). What these
two situations have in common with rape is not trauma but a
limited opportunity to collect a particular man's genes. The
physiological mechanism for conception is also likely to be the
same in all three situations — ovulation in response to intercourse
(Scene 15).
It is not difficult to see why a woman should want to make the
most of a limited opportunity to collect the genes of a partner or a
lover. But why should she want to make the most of a one-off
opportunity to collect the genes of a rapist?
It was to answer this question that we needed to consider earlier
whether human rapists have an above- or below-average
reproductive success. As we have seen on many occasions in this
book, the genes of males who have an above-average reproductive
success are desirable targets for a woman's body.
If she can collect such genes, she will increase her reproductive
316 317SPERM WARS
success via male descendants who inherit the same potential for
success. Since we decided for rapists that, on balance, they do
indeed have above-average potential, it should be no surprise to
find that when a woman's body has a one-off opportunity to
collect a rapist's genes, it often does so.
This conclusion does not mean, as people often assume, that a
woman should therefore seek to be raped. On the contrary, it is
reproductively important to the woman that her body collect genes
from only the most successful of rapists. If she conceives to an
inept rapist, doomed quickly to be caught and to suffer social
retribution and incarceration, her male descendants would inherit
unsuccessful characteristics. As we discussed earlier (Scene 28), a
man needs to pass certain tests if his genes are to be acceptable to
a woman. The only way a woman's body can select out the most
successful of rapists is to do everything possible to avoid being
raped. She should avoid risky situations and take full advantage of
the protection offered by her partner, by other individuals, and by
the wider society. Whether she should also try to fend off the
rapist physically will depend on her assessment of the danger of
being physically damaged. Unlike the tests set by women during
rough-and-tumble sex play (Scene 28), she may often be better
advised to follow the example of the girl in Scene 33 and not
resist. A woman who follows this overall strategy is unlikely to
fall victim to any but the most cunning, determined and competent
of rapists. The result is that only a minority of women are ever
raped, but those who are may then respond by conceiving.
Our discussion should not end here. If rape can be a successful
alternative reproductive strategy for men, and if conceiving via
the more competent of rapists can be a successful reproductive
strategy for women, we need to ask why rape is not more
common. In particular, we need to discuss whether rapists are a
genetic minority, like bisexuals (Scenes 30 and 31), or whether
all men are potential rapists. This question will be examined in
Scene 34.
318
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
The only remaining question to answer here is why the rapist
In Scene 33 was the winner of the sperm war inside his victim's
body. In fact, the contest was very one-sided. First, the girl's
boyfriend, because he normally used a condom, failed to enter an
army until it was too late. The fertilisation trophy had already
been claimed. Secondly, all week her holiday partner had also
been using a condom. So when the day of our scene began, the
girl contained no sperm. On the night of the rape, her holiday
lover actually inseminated her. But this made little difference
because his body, unable to allow for having used a condom
previously (Scene 29), will have calculated that few sperm were
needed to top her up, it being only a day since they last had sex.
In addition, he had just inseminated another female and, as it was
their first intercourse, he would have given her a large inseminate.
The result was that the victim received from her holiday lover
only a small inseminate, one rich in young killers and egg-getters
but relatively low in immediate blockers. In addition, she had
ejected the flowback from that intercourse before being raped.
The overall result was that, when the rapist inseminated the
girl, his seminal pool had her vagina to itself. Moreover, his perm
were confronted with only a minimal cervical filter and a small
army of killers. He will have injected a large army, full of killers
and egg-getters. Admittedly, the holiday lover had an hour or so's
start, but ovulation was still two days away. It is likely that by the
time the egg-getters in her oviduct encountered an egg, they will
virtually all have been from the rapist. Another set of rapist genes
will have been passed on to the next generation.
319SPERM WARS ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
SCENE 14
Soldier, Soldier
A single shot rang out. A flock of large black birds flew noisily
out of the trees as the five soldiers threw themselves to the ground.
While the men lay quietly in the cover of vegetation by the side of
the road, the birds circled briefly above them before re-settling
one by one in the trees. Quietness returned. The soldiers looked at
each other, checking first whether anybody had been hit, then
whether anybody had any idea where the shot had come from.
They waited for a while, then crawled along the roadside on their
knees and elbows, seeking the cover of trees just ahead of them.
Once sheltered, they discussed the situation. A few minutes
ago, one of them had noticed a house. Almost hidden by trees, it
was by the side of a rough path that joined the road. A sniper in
the house might just have had one chance for a shot at them
through the trees as they passed. They decided to investigate and
planned their approach for maximum cover, splitting into two
groups: three to enter the front of the house, two to go in by the
back.
The house was small and in poor repair, but obviously
inhabited. There was no sign of a potential sniper at the windows,
but the soldiers took no chances in their final approach. It was
very hot and the group of three were soaked in the sweat of
exertion and tension as they paused by the front door. When they
burst in they found nothing more threatening than an elderly
couple, a baby, and a young girl of about twelve. Nevertheless, the
soldiers remained tense and alert. The girl ran screaming to her
grandmother, who was holding the baby. Adrenaline still coursing
through his veins,
the soldier in command asked the grandfather who else was in the
house. 'Nobody,' said the old man, fear in his eyes and voice. The
soldier hesitated, very much on the edge. He pointed HI the
children and asked the whereabouts of their parents. The old man
looked at his partner, then said they were dead, shot by people
like them.
The soldier looked around, told the old man that if he was lying
he also was dead, then ordered his two companions to search the
house. The pair moved tentatively towards me only other exit
from the room. It had no door, but a makeshift curtain. As they
reached the doorway, there was a sudden movement in the room
beyond. They dodged quickly to either side of the exit, guns
raised. One of them reached for the curtain just as they heard the
back door burst open. The other two members of their patrol had
arrived. There was the sound of scuffling, then the curtain was
thrown back and the two soldiers appeared, pushing a woman in
her late twenties in front of them. She fell to the floor. As she
raised herself to her knees, her daughter ran to her and clung
round her neck, sobbing.
The soldier in charge pointed his gun at the old man.
'You lied, you're dead,' he said.
'You did kill their father,' the old man replied.
'And now we're going to kill you,' continued the soldier, 'but
maybe not yet. I think you deserve to watch us have our fun, first.'
He ordered the others to check the house, inside and out. While
they were out, he stood over his captives, gun in hand, waiting
and smiling. The others returned. He ordered one to Watch the
back, another the front, and the other two to watch the old couple.
The soldiers knew what was coming, and began to relax. This
wasn't the first time during this war they had been in this position.
Their commander looked at the mother and her twelve-year-old
daughter, sobbing in each other's arms. Then he shouted to his
companions, asking them which it was to be, the mother or the
daughter. The mother shouted hysterically, clutched her
320 321SPERM WARS ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
daughter, and begged the soldier to take her, not the child. The
soldier pulled the girl away from her mother and threw her back
towards her grandmother. Then, prodding the mother with his gun,
told her to stand up and take off her clothes. When she was naked
he pulled her over to a table in the corner of the room, making her
bend over to rest her face and chest on the table. He had chosen the
location carefully, so that while standing behind her he could still
see the room. Once satisfied with his vantage point, he threw his
gun to one of his companions, opened his trousers, and entered the
woman from behind. Throughout the intercourse, he was coolly
vigilant, only losing his concentration during ejaculation itself. As
he removed himself, he told the woman to stay where she was.
Then he walked over to retrieve his gun and told the soldier who
had been holding it that he was next.
One by one the soldiers took it in turns to inseminate the woman
in front of her daughter and parents. Throughout her forty-minute
ordeal, the woman occasionally sobbed but, afraid that they might
turn on her daughter instead, did not once ask them to stop. When
all of the soldiers had had their turn, she slumped to the floor in
the corner, unable to look at anyone. The soldiers allowed her
daughter to run over and join her, but made her stay naked, not
allowing the grandmother to take over her clothes.
For a while, the soldiers sat around, smoking and laughing,
recovering from their exertion. Inevitably, somebody eventually
suggested that maybe they should have the daughter anyway. A
heated discussion broke out. Two of them voiced their disapproval
and swore at their companions for even considering the prospect.
But the soldier in command was keen. He told the other two they
could abstain if they wanted, but he was going to make the most of
their find. When the mother tried to stop him from taking her
daughter, he knocked her unconscious with the butt of his gun.
When three of them had raped the young girl, their commander
decided it was time to leave. They were just about
322
to open the front door when he told his companions to stop.
Turning to the grandfather, he asked the old man if he had really
thought he would forget to do what, on first arriving, he had
promised; then he shot him. Next, he turned his gun towards the
old woman, who was still holding the baby. He paused, finger on
trigger, then smiled. Telling her that her family had given him
enough fun for one day, he lowered his gun.
Two children were conceived that day, one by the mother and
one, against all odds, by the twelve-year-old girl. However, the
soldiers would never know nor care which of them was the father,
in either case. No sooner were they clear of the house than they
were all dead, gunned down by guerrillas. The young girl's father
had seen the soldiers approaching and gone for help.
e have already discussed the presence of predatory rape
in the male sexual repertoire (Scene 33). Our conclusion
was that rape is a strategy by which a man can increase the
number of women who might have his children. Any child sired in
this way is a bonus, an addition to those fathered via a
conventional long-term relationship. And in order to gain this
bonus, a rapist has to negotiate successfully the defences that
surround a woman. Rape is a risky strategy, and incompetent
rapists lose out rather than gain from their behaviour.
We have also discussed why women should do everything
possible to avoid being raped. Having been raped, however, a
woman may gain, reproductively, by then conceiving.
All of the arguments rehearsed in Scene 33 apply with equal
force to the 'gang rape' we have just witnessed (which is loosely
based on a documented event in a recent war). Before examining
gang rape in humans, we shall first look at the phenomenon in
other animals. Males of at least one species of monkey are known
to band together for this purpose. But the most detailed
information is available for birds, in which gang rape is
particularly common and has been described for many species.
323
WSPERM WARS
On his own, a male bird finds it almost impossible to force
copulation on a female. Intercourse in birds involves the male
balancing precariously on the female's back, then bending his tail
under hers. Most do not have genitalia as such, but simply a small
sac which they have to evert. Male and female sacs are similar,
and sperm are transferred by the male and female pressing their
sacs together once the male is in position. On his own, a male can
easily be dislodged from a female's back. Moreover, she can avoid
accepting his sperm simply by not everting her genital sac. A
group of males, however, can effect copulation by forcing her to
the ground through weight of numbers and then continuing to peck
and attack her until she accepts sperm transfer. Females who do
not comply have been known to die in the melee.
There are more benefits to gang membership than simply being
able to force insemination. A gang is also more able to brush aside
the female's defences, either her own or those of guarding males.
In some species of duck, for example, the gangs divide their
labour. On discovering a female and her partner, some of the gang
chase and keep away the guarding male, while the others rape the
female. Members of the gang swap roles, so that over a period all
benefit from their membership.
The benefit of gang rather than individual rape to male birds,
therefore, is that through cooperation they each increase their
chances of inseminating an unwilling female. The cost is that on
each occasion their sperm have to engage in warfare with sperm
from other males in the gang. Whether a male gains an overall
advantage from being a gang member depends on how these costs
and benefits balance out. Mainly, it depends on whether the greater
number of females a male inseminates through gang membership
compensates for his reduced chance of fertilisation on each
occasion. If he is a member of a gang of four, he has only a one in
four chance of fathering any child produced by their activities, so
only if the gang as a whole manages to inseminate more than four
times as many females as the male could on his own is his
membership worthwhile. For this reason, gangs tend to be rather
small. A group of ten will not be twice as effective
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
at raping females as a group of five — yet a male in the larger
gang has only half the chance of winning sperm warfare of a male
in the smaller.
As far as humans are concerned, a significant proportion of all
predatory rapes are gang rapes — even in peacetime. Some
estimates suggest that 70 per cent in industrialised societies are
gang rapes. Others suggest about 25 per cent. Inevitably, human
males gain all the same reproductive benefits from gang
membership as other male animals. The same arguments apply
and the size of human gangs tends to be small, usually four or five
individuals.
In our discussion of predatory rape in Scene 33, we left open
one very important question. If rape can be a successful alternative
reproductive strategy for men, and if conceiving via the more
competent of rapists can be a successful reproductive strategy for
women, why is rape not more common? There are two extreme
possibilities, just as there were for prostitutes (Scene 32). One is
that rapists are a genetic minority, like bisexuals (Scenes 30 and
31). The other is that all men are potential rapists — but that rape
still remains rare because few men ever encounter a situation in
which the potential reproductive benefits of rape outweigh the
potential reproductive costs (many of which are imposed by the
wider society (Scene 33)). Of these two possible explanations, the
latter seems likely to be nearer the truth — because in wartime the
incidence of all forms of rape, including gang rape, increases
dramatically.
There are three main reasons why this is so. First, having routed
its enemy, a successful army has effectively removed the males
who might otherwise defend the women. Secondly, the mobility
and confusion of war make it very difficult for rapists to be
tracked down. Thirdly, because of the ever present risk of
imminent death, the prospect of social recrimination for rape
seems trivial. On balance, therefore, unlike in peacetime, men In
the midst of war are much more likely to chance across a situation
in which the reproductive benefits of rape outweigh the costs.
324 325SPERM WARS
The increased incidence of rape during warfare is due to more
men becoming rapists, not to a limited number of men raping
more often. This pattern is much more what we should expect if
all men were potential rapists, rather than if only a fixed genetic
minority had rapist inclinations. Unpalatable though this might
be, it should be no more so than that other facet of male
behaviour highlighted by war — that all men are potential killers.
The soldiers in Scene 34 were essentially ordinary young men
who, had they been born at another time in another place, would
have proclaimed themselves incapable of either rape or killing.
Yet, in a wartime scenario, they found it within themselves to
commit both. This should not be so surprising. As we discovered
in Scene 33, we all possess the genes of rapist ancestors. For the
same reasons, we all possess the genes of past killers.
First, let us consider wartime killing. Few people would deny
that the predisposition to wage war against neighbouring
communities has a biological basis. Similar behaviour is shown
by many social animals, from insects to primates. Neighbouring
communities of chimpanzees, for example, each forty or so
strong, have been seen to engage in what can only be described as
inter-group warfare. One social group was observed over a period
of several months systematically murdering individuals from the
other group, until none were left. As far as humans are concerned,
historical inter-village battles in New Guinea and South America
should be regarded as little different, either in scale or in
territorial motivation. Only the distance from which the people
could kill each other was different. And although modern human
warfare between nation states is clearly greater in terms of scale
and mayhem, the behaviour, motivations and fears of the
individuals concerned as they kill each other are just the same.
Distasteful though it might be to accept, most people are alive
today only because at some time in the past the wider society in
which their ancestors lived successfully waged war
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
and killed people. That society either successfully attacked or
defended itself in warfare against an enemy intent on territorial
defence or expansion. History books are full of civilisations and
societies that have been annihilated by their neighbours.
Obviously, we are more likely to be the descendants of the
killers, and not of the ones who were killed, so we all have the
potential to kill. Whereas in wartime, many people are
continually encountering circumstances in which the benefits of
killing another person far outweigh the costs, in peacetime far
fewer people encounter such circumstances. Next, let us consider
wartime rape. We have all inherited our genes from those men
amongst our wartime ancestors who took their opportunities to
reproduce when they could, •von when it involved rape. We have
not inherited the genes of men who opted to wait for a safer and
more conventional opportunity in a future that for them never
came. Those men In Scene 34 who decided not to rape the young
girl did not live to produce more children who would inherit their
compassion, whereas one of the men who raped her did produce
a child to inherit his lack of compassion. It is by this process of
weeding nut genes that do not enhance reproductive success that
evolution has saddled the majority of men with the propensity to
behave as rapists in the appropriate situation.
Wartime rape and murder also combine to shape our
characteristics in the process known as genetic infiltration.
Warfare displaces and sometimes annihilates whole lineages by
this process. The invading armies annex lands and rape the
women. Then subsequent settlers establish relationships and have
children in less aggressive ways. By this means, whole genetic
stocks can be infiltrated and diluted almost out of existence by
more successful genetic lines. There are few people in the world
today who do not contain at least a few genes from ancestors
who, two thousand years ago, lived In a completely different
geographical area. Wartime rape is one of the key elements in
this ebb and flow of genes across the earth's surface. Not one of
us would be precisely the person
326 327SPERM WARS
we are today if one of our ancestors had not taken advantage of
the relative immunity of war to commit rape and murder.
Biologically, it might seem strange that the men in Scene 34
considered a twelve-year-old girl a suitable target. But,
unfortunately, it is not. Authenticated records show that women
have conceived at all ages between seven and fifty-seven, with
unconfirmed reports of women conceiving up to the age of
seventy. Reproductively, therefore, a predisposition to find any
woman between these ages to be sexually attractive is not totally
futile. Pre-pubescent girls may ovulate before their breasts and
pubic hair develop and before their first show of menstrual blood.
Post-menopausal women may conceive up to at least eighteen
months after their last period. In between, as we have discussed
at length (as in Scene 2), men are totally unable to judge whether
and when a woman is fertile.
As far as rape is concerned, young girls and older women are
in a sense victims of their gender's success at unconsciously confusing and deceiving men. Unable to decipher female fertility, the
male body has responded evolutionarily by a blanket approach —
inseminating whoever and whenever it can. As we have noted,
given the choice it will prefer women in their most fertile years
(twenty to thirty-five), but under some circumstances it will find
even very young and very old women attractive. Faced with four
females, one a baby, one twelve years old, one in her late
twenties and one in her sixties, all of the men in Scene 34 wanted
to inseminate the woman in her late twenties, three wanted to
inseminate the twelve-year-old, and none wanted to inseminate
the older woman or the baby. Under different circumstances, with
a more restricted choice for the men, the older woman might also
have suffered rape.
The two who were raped both ovulated and conceived. Perhaps
they were stimulated to ovulate by the rape itself, as we discussed
previously (Scene 33). This was almost predictable for the
mother, but was against the odds for the daughter. Given that
females might ovulate in response to rape, the chances of the
mother conceiving could have been as high as about one in
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
three. The chances for the daughter conceiving, however, were
probably no higher than one in fifty.
It is difficult to guess which of the soldiers sired the two
children. Inevitably, one of the features of gang rape is that it
generates intensive sperm warfare in the victim. All else being
equal, we might expect the first male who inseminated each
female to be the reproductive winner (Scene 21). He was the one
whose egg-getters got a head start in reaching the oviducts,
whose killers were first to take up their positions in the womb,
and whose blockers had the chance to establish themselves in the
cervix. However, as we discussed in Scene 21, much will have
depended on how quickly the subsequent men also inseminated
the female, on how efficiently each penis removed the seminal
pool from the man before, and on precisely when each female
ovulated. In Scene 34 the odds will have favoured the soldier in
command because he was the first to inseminate both females,
but any one of the doomed men could have left a descendant to
perpetuate his rapist genes.
SCENE 35
Men Are All the Same
The sound of laughter erupted from the corner of the bar. The
two women at the table looked around, suddenly feeling
Conspicuous — but they had drunk enough not really to care.
They leaned towards each other again, the taller of the two
making the shape of a cup with her free hand, determined to
convey to her friend just how big her partner's testes were. She'd
seen quite a few men's packages in her time, she said, and her
partner's were by far the biggest.
The two hadn't met for years but had exchanged the
occasional letter. Finally, they had decided it was time to meet
up again, so the other woman had invited her friend,
328 329SPERM WARS
her partner and their two young children to stay for the weekend.
Tonight, the men had wanted to watch some sport on the
television, so the women had decided to leave them to baby-sit
while they went out to get drunk and catch up on each other's
lives. Now that they were drunk, what they really wanted to talk
about was sex. In particular, they wanted to know about each
other's sex life.
The other woman wasn't sure that she would like big testes.
Her own partner, she said, trading information, had really small
ones, smaller than table tennis balls. His penis seemed a bit
small, too. Not wanting to miss the opportunity, the taller woman
said her partner's penis was definitely big. Sometimes she wished
it weren't quite so big. He tended to be really vigorous when he
was thrusting and sometimes he hurt her. She didn't know what it
was inside her that he kept poking, but it was certainly
uncomfortable. She also wished he didn't want sex quite so often.
Most of her friends, she said, were down to once a week, but,
even after all this time, she still had a job to keep him down to
two or three times a week. Even then she reckoned he
masturbated if she ever left him alone in the house.
That would be no good for her, her friend said. She wouldn't
be able to cope with having sex that often. Fortunately, her
partner also had a low sex drive — they were lucky if they
managed it twice a month now. It had been once or twice a week
when they first started living together, but it had soon declined.
As for masturbation — they had never talked about it. She wasn't
even sure he'd know how to. The taller woman laughed and then
expressed her amazement that they had never talked about it. One
of the first things her partner would tell her when she returned
after leaving him alone in the house was whether he had
masturbated. Maybe he didn't always tell her, but she thought he
did usually.
They paused to sip their drinks. The other woman hesitated,
summoning the courage to ask what for her was a big question.
Falteringly, in a quiet, confidential voice, she asked her friend
how often she came during sex. Without any surprise or
330
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
self-consciousness, the taller woman replied that she came
sometimes — but her partner expected her to come every time.
In the early days, she had told him once or twice that she hadn't
and he had sulked for hours. Ever since, if she didn't come, she
faked it. Besides which, she said, he could keep going for hours,
just waiting for her. If she didn't fake it, he would never stop.
Feeling uncomfortable, the other woman took another sip. She
found some consolation in her friend's answer, but not much.
There was a brief silence. She knew it was her turn to reciprocate
but couldn't decide whether to tell the truth or not. In the end, she
admitted that she had never come during sex. In fact, she didn't
think she had ever had an orgasm. When they pad sex, her
partner just stuck it in and ejaculated. Admittedly, he had tried —
at least in the early days. He used to fiddle around between her
legs during foreplay, but it had never really done much for her. If
anything, she used to get embarrassed rather than excited. In the
end, she had told him not to bother and just to get on with it.
Once or twice she had felt something during intercourse but it
had never amounted to anything. She wasn't sure whether it was
her or him, but she had just never got anything from sex —
except their baby.
In a matter of fact way that shocked her friend, the taller
woman asked if it was any better with other men. The other
woman smiled and shook her head. There hadn't been any other
men, she said. The taller woman asked if she meant never, or not
since she had been living with her partner. When told never, she
expressed disbelief, astounded that anybody could get to thirty
and only ever have had sex with one man. She must have had at
least twenty. When asked if she meant when she was younger or
if she had had other men since living with her partner, she
laughed at the innocence of the question and said both. She
expected at least one fling a year. She'd even had sex with
someone else while she was pregnant with her first child. The
thought of only having sex with her partner and missing out on
the excitement of someone new occasionally was unimaginable.
331SPERM WARS
Unsure of how she felt about her friend in the light of these
revelations, the other woman tried to think of a suitable
response. In the end, she simply said she didn't know how the
other managed to get away with it. Her own partner hardly ever
let her out of his sight and she was sure he would know if she
even thought about being unfaithful. Her friend said she
sometimes wished her partner were a bit more attentive. Not too
much, but a bit. Sometimes she thought he didn't care what she
did. He was never around when she needed him — for all she
knew, he could be having a different woman every week. There
were always women around him. He could take his pick. It
would be a hopeless task trying to turn him into an attentive
partner and father. In any case, if she did, it would give her far
less chance to enjoy herself.
She leaned forward and touched her friend's hand. Apparently
taking no account of the latter's confessed fidelity, she told her
what she should do if she wanted a partner who would give her
orgasms. In a whisper, she confided that the best lover she had
ever had had been gay. She hadn't realised until she had seen him
holding hands with another man in a bar a few weeks after they
had finished. He had been wonderful, and had always seemed to
know exactly what she wanted. Try and find yourself one, she
urged.
Her friend was just about to recoil at a prospect so alien to her,
when one of the men at the bar began to make his way unsteadily
over to their table. He put down his drink and balanced himself
awkwardly with arms outstretched, fists on the table. Dribbling
slightly, he observed that the two women looked as though they
knew how to have a good time. Why didn't they come with him? He
could give them a night to remember. Maybe they should toss a
coin to see who could have him first.
The taller woman told him to drop dead. When he didn't leave,
she stood up and pushed him away. He fell backwards on to the
floor, then got to his feet and swore at them before
staggering back to the bar. The woman sat back down, picked up
her drink and smiled at her friend. Deep down, she observed,
332
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
men were all the same. Drunk or sober, young or old, they were
only interested in one thing. If they had half a brain as well as
genitals they would really be quite dangerous.
exually, men are much more similar to each other than are
women. Virtually all men ejaculate (whereas not all women
have orgasms). Virtually all men masturbate (whereas nearly a
quarter of women do not). Virtually all men have nocturnal
orgasms at some time in their lives (whereas 60 per cent of women
do not). Nevertheless, men do still differ in the ways they pursue
reproductive success. There are roughly four different strategies.
One strategy mentioned in Scene 35 is bisexuality (discussed at
some length in Scene 30). The two other strategies described by the
women in the scene represent the two ends of the male spectrum of
sexuality. We have met these two types of men before in a different
context (Scene 19). One specialises in sperm warfare, the other in
avoiding sperm warfare. In between these two types lie the
majority of men who intermesh an avoidance and a seeking of
sperm warfare in as productive a way as possible. Just which
strategy a male is programmed to adopt will depend largely on his
rate of sperm production — which in turn depends on the size of
his testes.
Men have a pair of testes of unequal size (on average, the right
is 5 per cent larger), which hang in a scrotal sac at different heights
(more often the left is lower). The testes of all mammals originate
inside the body in the same position as the ovaries — and in many
species that is where they stay. In other species, such as humans,
they descend into the scrotal sac before birth and stay there
throughout life. In yet other species, the testes descend during the
breeding season, then go back inside the body for safe keeping
once the breeding season is over.
Scrotal testes are more vulnerable than internal testes and can
easily be damaged. The main compensation is that, because they
allow the sperm to be stored at a lower temperature than
333
SSPERM WARS
if they were stored inside the body, it is easier for the sperm to
keep fitter and healthier for longer. When men are naked, their
sperm are stored at a temperature that is 6°C cooler than if they
were inside the body, but when they are clothed, the difference is
only 3°C.
On average, taller and heavier (but not obese) men have larger
testes. Some men, though, have testes that are relatively large for
their body size; others have testes that are relatively small. This
difference is genetic and heritable. As long as there are no
associated clinical problems, even the smallest of testes can
produce enough sperm for fertilisation in the absence of sperm
warfare. Moreover, small testes are less vulnerable and less likely
to be damaged than larger ones. So why don't all men have small
testes? The answer is that when sperm warfare is likely, small
testes are a major handicap. The sexual strategy that a man does
best to pursue, therefore, is dictated to a large extent by the size of
his testes.
Men with larger testes manufacture more sperm per day,
ejaculate more often, and introduce more sperm at each
intercourse. Interestingly, they don't ejaculate more sperm during
masturbation. They spend less time with their partner, and are
more likely to be unfaithful and to choose a partner who will also
be unfaithful. The converse is true, in all these respects, for men
with smaller testes.
In short, men with larger testes are programmed to specialise in
the pursuit of sperm warfare — warfare which, because of their
large sperm armies, they are likely to win. Men with smaller
testes, on the other hand, are programmed to specialise in mate
guarding, fidelity and the avoidance of sperm warfare — warfare
which, because of their small armies, they would be likely to lose.
So who is the more successful reproductively, a man with small
testes or a man with large ones? The answer seems to be neither.
Just as for bisexuality, evolution seems to have produced a
balance such that men with large testes and men with small do
equally well.
To illustrate this point, imagine a population of men with
334
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
small testes, injecting few sperm into their respective partners
and making no attempt to inseminate other men's partners. Into
this population comes a man with large testes who not only
claims a partner of his own but also tries to inseminate other
men's partners. At first, he does extremely well. Every time he
inseminates another man's partner he is likely to win the sperm
war because he introduces a larger sperm army. Yet, at the same
time, he is safe from the possibility of 'cuckoos' appearing in his
own nest because other men are not inseminating his partner. As
a result, at each generation men with large testes produce more
children than men with small. Moreover, their male descendants
inherit their large testes, their promiscuity and their ability to win
sperm warfare.
But this success eventually becomes self-defeating. At each
generation there are more and more men with large testes —
descendants of the original invader — and in the end such men no
longer have an advantage. First, they are no longer assured of
winning sperm wars because the women they inseminate are
being inseminated by other men with large testes. Secondly, their
own partners are now vulnerable to being inseminated by other
men with equally large testes. Thirdly, the greater promiscuity in
the population puts everybody at greater risk to disease,
particularly the most promiscuous — such as themselves. Thus,
when there are too many men with large testes in the population,
the less well endowed ones who concentrate on guarding their
partner against other men actually do better. Not least this is
because such men are less at risk to disease and their smaller
testes are less vulnerable to accident and damage.
So if sperm war specialists with large testes ever become too
common in the population, they actually do worse reproductively
than men with small testes. We have met this situation before
(Scene 30) and the outcome should be the same. The proportion
of men with large testes settles down at the level at which, on
average, such men do no better and no worse than men with
small ones.
In Scene 35, the man with large testes was raising two
children
335SPERM WARS
who may or may not have been his. In addition, he may or may not
have produced other children with other women. The man with
small testes was raising one child, which was certainly his
(according to his partner). The latter male has greater certainty, the
former has greater potential. On average, however, the two types of
men should produce equal numbers of children.
In between these two extremes of testis size and reproductive
strategy lie the majority of men — those with testes of intermediate
size. These employ a 'mixed' strategy by which they try to strike
the best compromise between mate guarding and sperm warfare,
but specialise in neither. The presence in the population of this
'mixed' majority might seem to complicate the picture, but in fact
the conclusion remains the same — their proportion is also fixed at
the level at which on average their reproductive success is no better
and no worse than males with smaller or larger testes. In effect, as
long as a man pursues a reproductive strategy appropriate to the
size of his testes and his rate of sperm production, he should on
average do just as well as other men with different-sized testes.
The sperm war specialist in Scene 35 had a large penis as well as
large testes, whereas the mate-guarding specialist had a small penis
as well as small testes. This should not be surprising, given that the
penis does have a role in sperm warfare — the removal of any
seminal pool from the vagina (Scene 21). On the whole, however, a
large penis is not as consistent a feature of sperm war specialists as
large testes — because, compared with testis size, penis size
influences the outcome of sperm warfare far less often. After all,
penis size is important only on those rare occasions when a man
has sex with a woman very soon after another man — so soon that
the latter's seminal pool is still at the top of her vagina. In contrast,
testis size, via sperm number, is always important in sperm
warfare.
This explains why there has been much more pressure on sperm
war specialists to have larger testes than to have a larger penis, but
it does not explain why any man should have a small penis. There
is, of course, a lower limit to penis size — that
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
below which a man cannot introduce sperm far enough up the
vagina. There is also an upper limit — that beyond which a man
would be unable to thrust without damaging the woman. Within
(his range, though, why should any man have a penis smaller than
the upper limit? The answer is that within this range there is no
real disadvantage to a smaller penis (other than being an
infrequent handicap for sperm warfare) and there may even be an
occasional advantage.
On the one hand, a smaller penis is no disadvantage in terms of
sperm retention. First, it is not particularly less efficient at
delivering a seminal pool to the top of the vagina. This is because
even when a penis of below-maximum size withdraws after
insemination, the vaginal walls close behind it (Scene 3),
effectively pushing the seminal pool to the top of the vagina.
Secondly, penis size has no influence on the probability of a man's
partner having an orgasm during intercourse.
On the other hand, a smaller than maximum penis may even be
an advantage, particularly during routine sex. Everything depends
on the costs and benefits of a man removing his own seminal pool
whenever he inseminates a woman twice in rapid succession, say
within thirty minutes or so (Scene 25). On these occasions, a
smaller penis will be an advantage if the previous seminal pool is
better left in place. If the pool is better removed, a smaller penis
can still do the job — it just takes longer. In many ways, therefore,
a smaller than maximum penis endows a man with greater
flexibility than does a larger one. It is also less likely to be
accidentally damaged.
Testis size and penis size vary not only between males within a
population, they also vary between populations and races. On
average, even relative to body size, Negroes tend to have larger
genitals than Caucasoids, and both have larger genitals than
Mongoloids. The number of sperm inseminated during intercourse
varies accordingly. It has been claimed that these differences
between populations reflect different balances in sexual strategy,
just as they do between men within populations. In other words,
populations with larger genitals (on
336 337SPERM WARS
average) should contain more men pursuing sperm warfare than
populations with smaller genitals (on average). Although this claim
has not been tested for different populations within the human
species, it has been tested between species.
In some species of primate, such as chimpanzees, females often
mate with several males and nearly every conception involves
sperm warfare. In others, such as gibbons, females rarely mate with
a male other than their partner and conception rarely involves
sperm warfare. Linked with this difference, chimps have much
larger testes relative to their body size than do gibbons. Humans,
with 4 per cent or more of children conceived via sperm warfare
(Scene 6), are intermediate between the two, both in terms of
warfare risk and testis size.
Not only primates but many other groups of animals have been
shown to have testes of a size appropriate to the risk of sperm
warfare. From butterflies to birds and from mice to men, the more
likely a male's sperm are to engage in conflict, the larger his testes
relative to the size of his body.
SCENE 36
Exquisite Confusion
His moment had come. It was a year since his second partner had
left him, a year of celibacy, anticipation and nothing but
masturbation. But, unless he did something totally stupid, it looked
as though this was going to be it.
It wasn't the first party he had thrown since she had left. It was
an easy way of filling the house with lots of young women (and a
few men). But it was the first at which he had managed to keep
anybody's attention for more than about ten minutes. He had
targeted this young girl, nearly thirty years his junior, the minute
she walked in the room. A friend of a friend, she stole his attention
immediately. He had waited until she looked
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
drunk, then moved in. They had been talking for hours. Even when
she had gone to the toilet, always a dangerous moment, she had
come back to him. For the last hour, their conversation had been
about sex. With an honesty born out of drunkenness, they had
traded increasingly personal details, such as how often (hey each
masturbated and how many partners they had each had. She was
well into double figures and sometimes despaired Of herself, she
confided, but she could never really think of a good reason to say
no.
She began to look sad and emotional. He said she shouldn't think
badly of herself. Without her experiences, she wouldn't be the
person she was now: so worldly, so relaxed and so attractive.
Those past sexual experiences had surely helped her become the
person that he, for one, was now finding so irresistible. With that,
he had stroked the side of her face with the back of his fingers. She
leaned her face against his hand and small tears appeared in her
eyes. She smiled and apologized as he wiped the tears from her
cheeks. Then, as he continued gently to touch her face, tracing his
fingers round her eyebrows, nose and mouth, she looked him in the
eyes with an expression he recognized from a previous lover - she
wanted sex. There were still people in the room, but the pair of
them were now oblivious. He moved his hand from her face to her
neck, then back again, stroking with his finger tips. Then he moved
down and traced round the edge of her low-cut dress, briefly
slipping his fingers inside so that they brushed over an erect nipple.
She made a tiny noise in her throat. His moment had come. He
took hold of her hand and suggested they go somewhere more
private. Unhesitatingly, she let him lead her.
As he led her upstairs to his bedroom he congratulated himself.
Maybe, at last, he was becoming competent at the sexual arts. The
thrust of the conversation he had just used to interest this girl had
been almost identical to the one he had used when he first seduced
his last partner, ten years ago. In fact, apart from this girl's
relatively tiny breasts, she could almost be his last partner.
338 339SPERM WARS ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
Within seconds of bolting the door, they were lying naked on the
bed and he had started the routine that according to his ex-partner
had made him an exquisite lover. His hands, lips and tongue began
to move over her body, with varying degrees of lightness and
strength. It was a well rehearsed routine that had never failed to
stimulate her to orgasm when she was as aroused as this girl seemed
to be. She used to lie there as he caressed her, getting more and more
excited as he spent more and more time massaging her clitoris until
she eventually climaxed. However, as he worked slowly over the
young girl's body, judging the right moment to move to her clitoris,
he realized that she wasn't reacting. Then suddenly she seized him
by the neck and kissed him passionately, almost violently. Taken
aback, he did his best to respond before trying to take the initiative
again. Rolling her on to her back, he forced his hand between her
legs. For him it was an unfamiliar angle, and she was moving so
much he couldn't find her clitoris. He had rarely had such a
problem with his ex-partner. But then she had always lain still
while he stimulated her.
Thrown from his usual routine, he placed his fingers in the girl's
vagina instead. She was very wet. But instead of allowing him to
gently move his fingers up and down, in and out of her vagina, as
did his ex-partner, she responded by vigorously rubbing her pelvis
against his hand for a few seconds. Then she quickly maneuvered
him on to his back and herself up his body. Next, in a movement he
had never come across before, she seemed to grab his penis with
her vaginal lips and virtually suck him in. He felt awkward lying on
his back because he was used to being on top. He tried to start
thrusting but the girl was thrusting too. His ex-partner used to lie
still and leave him to orchestrate the whole intercourse. But then,
she had usually climaxed during foreplay, if she was going to
climax at all.
Concentrate though he might, he just could not synchronize his
thrusting to the girl's. He kept coming out. Each time she lost his
penis, she would simply relocate it with her vaginal lips and suck
him in again. In the end, he gave up trying
to thrust and left all the movements to her, patiently and politely
waiting for her to climax before he ejaculated. The sounds in her
throat grew louder and louder. Then, suddenly, she stopped - no
contractions, no apparent release or relief, no anything. As she
stopped moving he began to thrust, but he was too late. Without
waiting for him to ejaculate, she removed herself and lay
breathlessly on the bed, leaving him erect, wet and frustrated.
As she lay, recovering, he kissed and stroked her. Desperate to
inseminate her, he tried to keep her interest, but it didn't work. A
few minutes later, she got off the bed and started to dress. He
assumed she was going to the toilet, but as she got to the door she
said goodbye. She had really enjoyed it, she said, but she had to
go. He protested that he hadn't yet come. She told him to do it
himself - if she had more time she would help him, but she really
had to go. Her boyfriend was coming to pick her up and take her
home. As she opened the door, he suggested they should do it
again sometime. She smiled, shook her head, and went.
After dressing, he went back down to the party, but most people
had gone and none of the girls still there attracted him. He ushered
the last few people out and went back to bed. But he couldn't sleep,
even after masturbating. He couldn't believe he had missed his
chance. He was nearly fifty and still he couldn't guarantee making
the most of his opportunities. It wasn't that he was inexperienced -
just that he had never met anybody like this girl before.
He had had little opportunity to learn about sex during
adolescence, and hadn't really got to grips with intercourse until he
had met his first partner. During their fifteen years together they
had produced two children. Yet not once in their entire relationship
did she have an orgasm. She had been totally passive. She didn't
like him touching her between her legs and refused to allow his
face anywhere near her pubic hair. Because of their lack of
foreplay, she was rarely wet when he tried to enter her. To get
herself lubricated, she used to urge him to put
340 341SPERM WARS
the tip of his penis just inside her vagina and then work himself
backwards and forwards gently. Once he was fully inside, she then
liked him to ejaculate quickly. If intercourse lasted too long, it was
as if she became embarrassed. On more than one occasion, she had
actually made him stop and withdraw because he was taking too
long. Ironic though it seemed in hindsight, he had convinced
himself while he was with her that there was no such thing as the
female orgasm.
When he was thirty, he had his first opportunity to be
unfaithful. At a party at work, one of the junior girls had started
stroking his leg with her foot. They went back to his office and
lay uncomfortably on the uncarpeted floor. Assuming she would
want the same as his partner, he missed out foreplay completely
and, in a tangle of half-removed skirt and knickers, trousers and
pants, tried to penetrate her immediately. She was offended by
his lack of consideration and disappointed that she wasn't going
to get an orgasm. Suddenly she had seemed to become aware of
the discomfort of the situation and equally suddenly became
overtaken by guilt - she, too, had a partner at home. Pushing him
away, she said that maybe sex wasn't such a good idea after all,
and left.
He nearly suffered the same fate three years later when he
tried to make love to his first real mistress. She, too, took offence at
his initial urgency. But instead of dismissing him after the first
occasion and despite being ten years his junior, she set about
educating him - and there was a lot he needed to know. For
example, in all his time with his partner he had neither touched
nor seen her clitoris. In truth, he didn't even know she had one
and, with the benefit of hindsight, he suspected that neither did
she. Two things his mistress did share with his partner were a
mild liking for having her nipples sucked and a strong dislike of
having his face between her legs. Whenever he tried, she
restrained him. He never did in fact see her clitoris. However,
she managed to show him both how to find it with his fingers
and, having found it, what to do with it. She didn't like him to
touch the clitoris bulb directly, preferring him to
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
massage and squeeze the area around it. But she never wanted to
climax during foreplay. He became expert at judging the right
moment to move from using his fingers to using his penis. And as
long as he judged the moment correctly, she always seemed to
climax during intercourse. Somehow, though, he always had the
feeling that she was faking it.
This first infidelity lasted a year and passed undetected by his
partner. It ended when his mistress met someone nearer her own
age. A year later, he began his second affair. He was now
relatively experienced at the deceptive techniques of infidelity, but
was still not fully convinced that the female orgasm was a reality.
As it turned out, his second mistress was not the person to
enlighten him.
Most of the time he was with her he felt like her puppet. They
worked together and from time to time had legitimate reason to
spend time together away from their respective partners.
Eventually, she let him into her bed on condition that he did not try
to penetrate her. On their first night, she helped him to ejaculate in
exchange for having him stroke her body and, particularly, to place
his head between her legs and lick her. At first he had no idea what
he was doing. Though he was now thirty-five, she was the first
woman who had actually urged or even allowed him such intimate
contact. Yet she was virtually insatiable, wanting him to lick her
genitals, thighs and anus for twenty minutes at a time so that she
was covered in his saliva. Even so, she never had an orgasm or
even became excited; she seemed to find his attention therapeutic
rather than stimulating.
A year later, on what was their tenth assignation, she was still
insisting that he could only have his excitement as long as he did
not penetrate her. This time, their business was abroad and they
were away for a fortnight. For two nights, he let her tell him what
to do but on the third night, as they lay naked and he had his head
between her legs, his excitement and frustration at last took him
beyond the threshold of reason. He slid up her body, kissing her as
he went. Then, while kissing her face and
342 343SPERM WARS
mouth, he slipped his penis into her vagina. She immediately
struggled but he pinned her down, smothering her protestations
with his mouth and free hand. She became violent, hitting and
scratching him whenever she could free a hand. But he was too
strong for her and so excited that he ejaculated quickly. When it
was over, she called him a bastard - but didn't throw him out. I Nor
did she get dressed, and within an hour she was taunting him into
forcing her to have sex again. Over the remaining week, they had
sex every night. Each night, he had to find a different way of
restraining and forcing her. She conceived that week but three
months later miscarried when her partner, having been denied sex
for well over a year, decided to leave her rather than bring up
somebody else's child.
Until his mistress miscarried, our man had been tempted to leave
his partner and help her raise the child. After the miscarriage,
though, he could not face the prospect of years of having to force
sex, and finished the relationship. But it 1 was too late. His partner
had been told of his affair by his mistress's, and three months after
finding out she left him for another man, taking their two children
with her.
There followed three short relationships, each girl as different
from the others as she could be. The first was afraid of sex. Raped
as a young girl, she had a fear of the erect penis that distressed him
almost as much as it did her. They drank excessively. Over the
course of a year they shared a bed perhaps five or six times, but
never managed to have intercourse. He didn't realize her similarity
to his last mistress until, at their last meeting, she asked him to rape
her. He obliged, emotionally torn at watching her distress as he
forced his penis inside her. Unlike his last mistress, however, she
did not come back for more and he never saw her again.
Now nearly forty, his next experience was a great shock. He had
been out celebrating with a small group of friends from work. They
had all returned to the house of a young couple barely in their
twenties, and were soon plunged into a drunken party with very
loud music and much raucous
344
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
laughter. Almost immediately the party was under way, the female
host had disappeared to her bedroom. She returned a few minutes
later wearing a short, almost transparent, white dress. Then,
seemingly unnoticed by her very drunk partner, she openly took
the hand of one unattached man after another and led him away to
her bedroom. When it came to his turn, she told him she had been
saving him till last. She took him upstairs and, without locking the
door, removed his trousers and underwear. As she took off her
knickers, he could smell the semen from the previous men.
Sitting on the edge of the bed, she began to give him oral sex.
From the noises she was making, she was becoming excited even
faster than he was. Eventually sounding frantic, she pulled him on
top of her and scrambled with her hands to insert his penis. As he
pushed himself in, she let out a blood-curdling scream and her
body began jerking wildly. The violence of her reaction was such
a shock to him that his erection began to fade. He carried on
thrusting, trying to rejuvenate himself. But just as she was
building up to a second crescendo and his own ejaculation was
only seconds away, her partner burst into the room. Only an
instant before he ejaculated he was pulled off her, pushed to the
ground, and ordered out. With apparently little surprise and with
minimal aggression, her partner proclaimed that now it was his
turn. Hardly faltering in her build-up at the change of penis, the
girl released yet another blood-curdling scream.
His third experience was with an exotic woman with whom he
had sex about five times. The first two times were clearly a
disappointment to her. She had refused to let him enter her
without extensive foreplay. Yet the foreplay he provided,
borrowed from his technique with his first mistress, seemed to do
nothing for her, and on each occasion it was with reluctance that
she eventually let him have intercourse. The third time, she told
him she would do it herself. She masturbated in front of him and,
after she had climaxed, allowed him to have intercourse. Years
later he was to realize that, had he
345SPERM WARS
already experienced the woman who was to be his second longterm partner, he would probably have been able to excite this
woman. What she did to herself was precisely what that second
partner later taught him to do to her. After twice watching his
exotic lover masturbate, he began to feel fairly incompetent. In
the end he found himself wondering if what she really wanted was
for him to force her, like his second mistress. He tried this, failed,
and was thrown out, never to be invited back.
Soon afterwards he met his second long-term partner, twenty
years his junior (the woman who had just left him, taking their
child with her). The first time they had sex she was so upset by
his urgency that he almost forfeited his second chance. Instead,
she relented and taught him what she needed. After two or three
years of education he became quite proficient. Quiet and
sensuous, she liked him to stroke her gently while she lay back,
soaking up the sensations. Unlike his first mistress, however,
sucking her nipples did little for her. She showed him precisely
where her clitoris was and how to find it. She liked the bulb itself,
once lubricated, to be rubbed and massaged directly.
Eventually, he could virtually guarantee giving her an orgasm
during foreplay, as long as she wanted him to. Rarely, very
rarely, did she have or even want an orgasm during intercourse,
saying they were so weak they weren't worth having. When each
episode began, she would tell him whether she felt like an orgasm
during foreplay or whether she just felt like intercourse. If she
changed her mind or if for some reason he was unable to excite
her, she would openly masturbate to satisfy herself. And she told
him about her nocturnal orgasms. As far as he knew, none of his
other partners had experienced them.
After ten years with her, he had felt able to excite and satisfy
any woman. Tonight's events had proved him wrong. Shocked
and disappointed, he drifted off to sleep in a sea of confused
thoughts. He would never understand women.
ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
ompared to men, women are incredibly varied in their sexual
characteristics. Some women (2—4 per cent) never orgasm;
others (5 per cent) have multiple orgasms, scarcely coming down
from one climax before building up to the next. Ten per cent never
climax during intercourse; another 10 per cent nearly always
climax. Some prefer to be totally passive in their build-up to
climax during intercourse; others prefer to be more active. Fifty
per cent masturbate regularly; 20 per cent never do. Finally, 40 per
cent have nocturnal orgasms, whereas others cannot even imagine
such an event.
Added to, and often associated with, these differences in orgasm
pattern are differences between women in the sensitivity of
different parts of their bodies. Some women have sensitive
nipples; others do not. Some have a clitoris so sensitive that they
dislike the bulb being touched; others have one that responds very
little to stimulation.
It is not quite true that no two women are the same - but to
many men it often seems that way. Why is there so much variety
to female sexuality, and what bearing does such variety have on
the female pursuit of reproductive success? The answer is that it is
yet another manifestation of the advantages gained from confusing
men (Scene 2) and testing their abilities (Scene 27). It works
because, as we have seen before (Scene 27), men have to learn
their sexual technique.
The man in Scene 36 was bemused. However, he wasn't quite
the failure he imagined himself to be. In fact, reproductively, his
life was fairly successful. He had two children with his first
partner and one with his second (assuming they were all his). But
he could have had even more. At different times during his life he
had the opportunity to impregnate seven other women, and to
varying degrees he had failed each time. On some occasions he
failed even to inseminate. On others, he failed to handle the
relationship either well enough or for long enough to have a
346
347
CSPERM WARS ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
realistic chance of paternity. The nearest he got to a child with a
further woman was with his second mistress. Eventually, her body
allowed him to fertilize one of her eggs. But it took him a year of
missed opportunities, and that was just too long. Had he
impregnated her earlier, he might successfully have deceived her
partner into raising another's child. Then the baby might never
have been miscarried and his reproductive success might have
been 33 per cent higher than eventually it was.
His failure to capitalize on opportunities to reproduce with
these seven women was due in every case to some combination of
surprise, shock and misjudgment. He did what he could, but he
was confused by the sheer variety of female sexuality. As he
moved from woman to woman he tried to extrapolate from his
past experiences. He assumed that techniques of seduction,
stimulation and insemination that had been successful in the past
would be successful in the future. To some extent, his approach
worked - his gradual accumulation of experience with different
females slowly increased his awareness and competence in the
sexual arts. But, even after encounters with eight very different
women, he still failed to inseminate a ninth.
In some species, experience gained by a male with one female
can readily be extrapolated to another. In other species, however,
such extrapolation is less successful - and it is least successful in
those such as humans in which the underlying female strategy is
the confusion of males. Then, not only do individual females
confuse their partner through unpredictable swings of mood and
behavior (Scene 2), but also the female population as a whole
manages to confuse through variety. As was clear from Scene 36,
a woman gains in three main ways from being as different as she
can be from other women.
First, she can set each man a much more challenging test of
experience and competence (Scene 27). From this she can quickly
learn whether he has a little or a lot of experience of other women.
Because women are so different, a man will only have
encountered her type before and thus know how to treat her if he
has had a lot of experience. If her priority is to avoid
disease or to find a faithful partner, she may actually prefer a
naive man. On the other hand, if her priority is to find a man who
is genetically more attractive (Scene 28) she may prefer someone
whom many other women have found attractive (Scene 27).
Secondly, she has more initial control at each sexual encounter
with a new man, which lasts for as long as it takes the man to
fathom the best way to relate to her. The result is that she has
more time to assess the man as a long-term partner. In Scene 36,
three women tested the main character sexually, but managed to
avoid being inseminated before rejecting him. One took longer to
decide how she felt about him, but was able to keep both the
number of inseminations and sperm retention down to a minimum
in the process. Two others managed to avoid insemination for
nearly a year while they made up their minds. One finally rejected
him, and the other conceived but later miscarried.
Thirdly, after accepting a man as a partner, she can still educate
him in her needs without facilitating his infidelity. In the scene,
two of the women (his first mistress and his second long-term
partner) evidently found the man's other qualities attractive
enough to tolerate his initial sexual incompetence. They then
began the relatively long process of educating him in helping
them to climax (Scene 27). This could have been self-defeating, if
his increased competence had made it easy for him to seduce
other women. Of course, it did help him a little, but not as much
as it would have done if women were more similar. His first
partner pursued the ultimate version of such a strategy. By not
having orgasms herself, she could not educate him at all. As a
result, she made him miss one opportunity for infidelity and
slowed him down in taking advantage of another.
Although it is not difficult to see that women can benefit
considerably from being different from one another, there has to
be a limit to this range of possibilities. Different though women
may be in their individual sexuality, therefore, we can
nevertheless still recognize a number of broad categories. These
categories are probably genetic, are probably in some sort of
348 349SPERM WARS ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
balance in the population, and are probably all most successful if
they are not too common.
We have met evolved balances of genetic categories before in
earlier scenes. The proportion of bisexuals and heterosexuals
(Scenes 30 and 31) and the proportion of men with different-sized
testes (Scene 35) are both examples of different categories coexisting in an evolutionary balance. When too common, each
category has a success rate that is below average. When rare, each
has an above-average success rate. The incredible variation in
female sexuality is simply the most complex example we have yet
encountered of such a balance. As in all previous examples, our
expectation will be that the balance point has been fixed by
evolution such that reproductively all of the different categories do
equally well.
So, what are these different categories? More importantly, are
the categories different simply for the sake of being different, or is
each category linked to other aspects of sexual behavior? The latter
seems the more likely. Just as large testes (Scene 35) and
bisexuality (Scene 30) predispose some men to specialize in
particular sexual strategies, the different orgasm patterns shown by
different women will also predispose them to particular sexual
strategies. For example, some orgasm patterns will help the women
concerned get the most out of the promotion and exploitation of
sperm warfare. Others will help the women concerned to get the
most out of fidelity and an attentive partner. Very crudely, while
accepting that the tremendous variation in female sexuality largely
defies categorization, we can make life easier for ourselves by
recognizing four main types.
The first consists of women who are programmed sometimes to
have (and sometimes not to have) the full range of possible
orgasms (masturbatory, nocturnal, foreplay, intercourse and postplay - with some being multiple). Although only about 5 per cent of
women have absolutely the whole range, an additional 25 per cent
have all except multiple orgasms, and an additional 40 per cent
again have all except multiple orgasms and nocturnals. All women
in this category can manipulate sperm retention in all
of the ways we have discussed (Scenes 22 to 26). In particular, they
can vary the frequency with which they have and do not have every
type of orgasm so as to take maximum advantage of the men and
opportunities which present themselves. They are thus probably the
women most able to exploit sperm warfare whenever it is
advantageous to do.
Although as a whole this first category of women is probably the
largest (about 75 per cent), there is tremendous scope for women to
differ within the category. For example, about 30 per cent within the
category both masturbate and have nocturnals, whereas 50 per cent
only masturbate and 10 per cent only have nocturnals. These
differences probably reflect variety for variety's sake, as we have
discussed. Masturbation and nocturnals are alternative means to the
same end (Scenes 22 and 23). Variation in emphasis on one or the
other outlet allows women to differ. It may also influence their
scope for secrecy in preparation for infidelity (Scene 23), but it is
unlikely to have major repercussions on their ability to manipulate
sperm retention. In addition to differences between women within
the category, each woman also has so much scope for varying her
own behavior (from phase to phase and man to man) that she need
never become predictable.
The second category consists of women who are programmed to
avoid one or other of the major avenues for the manipulation of
sperm retention and warfare. Either they do not have solitary
(masturbatory and nocturnal) orgasms or they do not climax in the
presence of men. In most cases, however, such women sacrifice
only a little of their manipulative ability. In compensation, they gain
by being slightly less common. Thus, about 10 per cent of women
are programmed neither to masturbate nor to have nocturnals, which
has the effect of del-egating responsibility for the manipulation of
sperm to orgasms in a man's presence. The full range of sperm
manipulation is still possible (via orgasms during foreplay,
intercourse and post-play - Scenes 22 to 25), but it becomes much
more important to the woman that she chooses a sexually competent
man. Other
350
351SPERM WARS ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
women (again about 10 per cent) are programmed never to climax in
a man's presence but do masturbate and/or have nocturnals. They also
have the full range of sperm manipulation. They can secretly prepare
a strong or a weak cervical filter- but what they cannot do is change
their minds at the last minute and bypass an over-strong filter (Scene
25).
The third category consists of those 10 per cent of women who
climax virtually every time they have penetrative sex. Such women
can still manipulate sperm retention, and thus play an active part in
influencing the outcome of sperm warfare - as long as they vary the
timing of their climax relative to the moment of insemination (Scene
25). An orgasm more than one to two minutes before the man allows
low sperm retention; any time thereafter allows high sperm retention.
The final category consists of those 2-4 per cent of women who
never orgasm, either during intercourse or via masturbation or
nocturnally. In compensation, as mentioned above, such a woman
gains by not educating her partner in sexual techniques that would aid
his infidelity. Unlike those in the previous three categories, such
women are the least able to influence the outcome of sperm warfare.
They are, however, well suited to the relatively safe process of
selecting a mate and making the most of that relationship. They do
have some control over sperm numbers, largely through waiting for
their cervical filter to weaken with time since their last intercourse
(Scene 22). But since sperm numbers are far less important for
conception than they are for warfare, in the absence of any possibility
of the latter it does not really matter how many sperm such a woman
retains from each intercourse.
Although it is possible to retain too many sperm for conception
from a healthy ejaculate (Scene 19), it is much more difficult to
retain too few. Admittedly, ejaculates containing few sperm are often
sub-fertile, even if the woman retains them in full. But this is not
because they contain few sperm - even vasectomised men who
occasionally introduce tiny numbers of sperm (perhaps fewer than a
hundred) into women have
fathered children. It is rather because the clinical conditions that
cause some men to introduce few sperm (perhaps only tens of
millions instead of hundreds of millions) at the same time render
their ejaculates sub-fertile.
The women in this final category do, of course, lose the benefits
of orgasm as a defense against infection. But then, of all the
categories of women, they are also the least likely to encounter
sexually transmitted diseases. In any case, it seems that even women
programmed to avoid manipulating sperm via orgasm may
nevertheless begin to orgasm if they are ever exposed to genital
infection. Just how they do so will depend on their anatomy. If their
clitorises are sensitive to stimulation they may suddenly experience
the urge to masturbate. However, it is often part of the programming
of such women that their clitorises are relatively insensitive to
stimulation. This may make it difficult for them to masturbate to
orgasm but, of course, in no way prevents them from climaxing
nocturnally. Clitorectomised women, for example, may still have
nocturnal orgasms.
The predisposition of different women for different sexual
strategies adds a final nuance to mate selection - an element that can
be added to those we have already accumulated (Scenes 18, 20, 21,
27, 28). This is that a woman should seek a partner whose approach
to sperm warfare complements her own. The small-testicled man in
Scene 35 who specialized in mate guarding was a good choice for
the woman who never climaxed. Similarly, the large-testicled man in
the same scene was a good choice for the woman with a varied
orgasm pattern who could gain the most from infidelity and sperm
warfare. This woman gained in two ways. First, her partner's
specializations for sperm warfare meant that his large sperm armies
gave the armies from her other lovers a good run for their money.
Secondly, because he pursued infidelity himself, he often left her
free to pursue her own reproductive success by following the same
course.
The final point to stress is the one we have stressed in other
scenes in this chapter - on average the different categories of women
should all reproduce equally well. The proportions of
352 353SPERM WARS
each category in the population will have stabilized at precisely the
appropriate level for this to occur. Consequently, no woman should
be hindered in her pursuit of reproductive success by the orgasm
regime with which she has been programmed - as long as her choice
of mate and subsequent behavior are compatible.
CHAPTER ELEVEN
Final Score
SCENE 37
Total Success
The old man reached out a gnarled and wrinkled hand. His stiff
fingers touched the hand of the woman sitting next to him outside
their home. She turned her head towards him, looking blindly
through opal eyes, and smiled. Eventually, everybody had come,
some of them traveling for days to be there. For the first time in
decades, the old couple were surrounded by their whole family, the
product of their long lives together. Including themselves, there
were five generations present. Their eldest son was now nearly
seventy; their youngest great-great-grandchild, just two weeks old.
The old man looked at his partner's face, his eyesight as keen as
hers was faded. The reality in front of him was a deeply wrinkled
face, blind eyes that so cruelly imprisoned her, kind mouth and a
one-toothed smile - she was so proud of that last tooth. But, for a
moment, what he saw was the smooth, beautiful face, clear, dark,
mischievous eyes, sensuous mouth and gleaming teeth that had so
fired his senses over seventy years ago. He still remembered, as if it
were yesterday, how he had chased her through the forest and, on a
bed of sweet-smelling leaves, had explored and entered her taut and
perfect body for the very first time. She had been a wonderful
partner, mother and grandmother, the perfect companion throughout
354SPERM WARS FINAL SCORE
life. He could remember only one phase, as she approached
menopause, when their relationship had been strained - but it had
lasted a mere five years.
He had had many opportunities to be unfaithful, and at times had
been tempted, but he had always resisted, so afraid had he been of
disease and of losing his princess. His last chance had been in his
early sixties when a flirtatious young girl of twenty, so impressed by
his status and well preserved body, offered him hers for the night.
But he had turned her down. It was one of the best decisions of his
long life, because five years later she was dead. She had succumbed
to the sexually transmitted disease which had become the scourge of
their community and which she had probably been harboring on the
night she offered herself. What would his partner and his family
have done for the last twenty-five years had he died and not been
around to sort out their problems and give them the benefit of his
experience?
The night after his last chance for infidelity, he and his partner
had sex for the very last time. Somehow, ever since, it had never
seemed worth taxing their ageing bodies with the effort - they
couldn't have been closer, sex or no sex. Now, swamped by the
emotion of the occasion, he told his partner that she was looking
wonderful.
Once again, the old woman smiled her one-tooth smile. Deep in
her stomach, the pain that was now her constant companion was
temporarily eclipsed by the sheer pleasure of hearing her family
around her. She squeezed her partner's hand. It was ten years since
she had been able to see him. No longer need she be troubled by the
reality of his frailty and his recent deterioration. More and more, the
image in her mind was not the worn old man she last saw with her
failing eyes but the muscular young athlete she had known all those
years ago. She still remembered, more clearly and accurately than
him even, the first time she had surrendered her body to him as they
swam naked in a lake.
It had been a few years before she conceived their first child, but
after that it had been easy. She had never really felt tempted
to be unfaithful. As her partner had grown in wealth and status, her
biggest fear had been that she would lose him. There had been long
spells in their life when she had found him irritating and arrogant,
but he was always kind, considerate and fun. As their family had
grown, not once had she found herself wishing for a better partner
or provider. She asked him once again to tell her who was there -
for a start, could he see all their children?
He looked around the huge group of people gathered outside their
home. Not only their family but the whole village had assembled for
the celebration, which was planned to last all day. The children
were running and chasing, many laughing, a few arguing or crying.
The adults were in scattered groups, some sitting on the ground,
others standing. Most were drinking, eating morsels of food, and
anticipating the main meal. Everywhere was the sound of
conversation, laughter and occasional raised voices as people
renewed old family friendships and feuds.
One by one, the old man located their five children. As he named
each one he saw, she nodded. They were all there. She had had eight
children but two had died in early childhood and a third, after
having a family of his own, had died a few years ago in his fifties.
Now the grandchildren, she urged him. He knew there should be
twenty-three but couldn't remember all their names. He picked out
the dozen he knew best, all in their forties, then had to rely on his
partner to supply the names of the younger grandchildren, some of
them still teenagers or younger. She remembered their names
clearly, but that didn't always help as he couldn't even begin to
remember what some of the younger ones looked like. Even so,
when she told him a name, he said they were present.
When the list was complete, she sat back in satisfaction. Twentythree surviving grandchildren. That was three more than her
lifetime friend and rival who, after a complicated and colorful life
of great sexual activity, had died ten years ago. Now, she missed
their camaraderie. They had been lucky. Most of their generation
had either died young from disease or
356 357SPERM WARS
FINAL SCORE
accident or had been infertile, or had lost many of their children
before they reached adulthood. Between them, she and her friend
had populated a large proportion of the village.
The old man said he hoped that she wasn't going to ask him to
count their great-grandchildren. She shook her head and laughed.
He could see the oldest, now nearly thirty, with her new-born, their
most recent great-great-grandchild. Last night, the old woman said,
she and their daughter had worked out that there ought to be fiftytwo of them and four more on the way, and already there were
sixteen great-great-grandchildren. He sat back and relaxed, freed
from his task of child-counting.
'Just look what we have done,' he remarked with satisfaction, not
for the first time forgetting her blindness. She squeezed his hand
again, then let him go, concentrating on the noise and conversation
around her.
Suddenly, there was a commotion. A gang of naked children ran
across the clearing as a group of young men, naked apart from a
belt around their waists, emerged from the forest. On their
shoulders the leaders were carrying the first of three large animals,
already skewered on a wooden spit. The food for their feast had
arrived.
n the course of this book, scene after scene has documented
incidents of infidelity; moments and situations in which
successive characters have snatched the opportunity to try to
increase their reproductive success just that little bit more than their
contemporaries. This final scene is a reminder that with the right
person in the right situation, the best way to achieve the greatest
reproductive success can sometimes be within a monogamous
relationship.
The scene is also a reminder that long-term relationships,
including monogamous ones, are estimated to have been a feature
of human sexuality for around three million years. Our huntergatherer ancestors (Scene 16), from the savanna of Africa to the
forests of South America and South-East Asia,
358
from the aboriginal outback of Australia to the Eskimo heart-land
of Canada, almost always formed long-term male-female
partnerships, most of which were monogamous. Unlike the
relationship in Scene 37, these partnerships did not necessarily last
a lifetime. Often a person had two, or even three, successive
involvements. But each one was monogamous (give or take an
occasional infidelity) while it lasted, involved deep personal ties,
and lasted for several years - very similar to what happens in
modern industrial societies.
Only during the fifteen thousand or so years of dependence on
agriculture did many human cultures switch to polygamy. Women
clustered around the men of greatest wealth - those with the largest
areas of cultivated land and those with most livestock. Even
polygamous relationships, however, are long-term and involve deep
ties between the male and each of his females. The women are
expected to be faithful to the man and he is expected to be faithful
to his designated collection of women.
Not until the advent of urbanization and industrialization over
the last few hundred years has there been a wholesale swing back
towards monogamy, or serial monogamy. But even now women
still cluster around the men of greatest wealth and status (Scene
18).
The woman in Scene 37 made a good decision, not to be
unfaithful. If, as it seems, her partner was the best provider around
and had the best genes available, she had nothing to gain
reproductively from infidelity (Scene 18), and everything to lose
(Scenes 9 and 11). She had only done a little better, however, than
her close friend who had had a much more varied sex life.
Presumably, this friend did not start with the advantage of such a
good partner. Had she opted to be faithful, she might have been less
successful - again, reproductively -than she was. How successful
the two women were may have had more to do with their ability to
attract a good mate than with their strategy of fidelity or infidelity.
They each pursued the best strategy for their circumstances.
The man in the last scene also made a good decision in
359
ISPERM WARS
avoiding infidelity. He did have much to gain (Scene 13), but he
also had much to lose (Scenes 9 and 11). In particular, in his
community there was always a real risk of contracting a lifethreatening disease, as well as the cost of losing his 'princess'. She
was fertile, faithful and a good mother and grandmother. Any
gains from infidelity might not have balanced the costs.
Although the majority of people do not pursue a lifetime of
pure monogamy, most (with few exceptions - Scenes 19 and 30)
achieve the greater part of their reproductive success within longterm relationships. Then, as long as the individual judges the
moment and the situation accurately, infidelity, rape, group sex,
prostitution, partner swapping and so on are all strategies that
provide the opportunity to be just that little bit more successful,
reproductively, than would be possible solely within a single
relationship. But all carry risks if badly executed or if the
individual does not have the weaponry of physique or character to
carry them through.
Maybe the couple in the last scene, particularly the man, could
each have achieved greater reproductive success through infidelity
and sperm warfare - but in all probability, because of their
circumstances, they would not have done. Their reproductive
strategy of faithful monogamy had, for them, been a total success.
Even though the couple in Scene 37 were monogamous and
faithful, they still could not escape the shadow of sperm warfare.
It is irrelevant that neither of them actually engaged in sperm
warfare. Their bodies will still have spent a lifetime 'on alert' for a
war that never came.
Everyone's body - with no exception - is similarly alert. Continuously throughout reproductive life, the body both assesses the
likelihood of sperm warfare and makes the appropriate
preparations. When the likelihood is low, some preparations are
made but they are minimal (Scenes 12 and 22). From time to time,
however, absolutely every body contemplates behavior
FINAL SCORE
that could lead to sperm warfare - and when it does, such
contemplation triggers an escalation in preparation (Scenes 13 and
26). More often than not, the contemplation is mere fantasy and the
preparations unnecessary - no war ensues. But even in our own
generation, the majority of men at least once in their lives act on
their fantasies and enter their sperm into battle
- and, at least once in their lives, the majority of women do
likewise and promote sperm warfare. When war does break
out, each person's body will have done its best to make sure
that it is well prepared and that there is a chance the war will
work to its reproductive advantage.
Few people will have thought deeply about sperm warfare and
its consequences before reading this book. Yet, if the phenomenon
did not exist, human sexuality would be far less colorful. Without
sperm warfare during human evolution, men would have tiny
genitals and produce few sperm. Women would not have orgasms,
there would be no thrusting during intercourse, no sex dreams or
fantasies, no masturbation, and we should each feel like intercourse
only a dozen times or so in our entire lives - those few occasions
when conception was possible and desirable. Sex and society, art
and literature — in fact, the whole of human culture - would be
very different.
Over the millennia, sperm warfare has helped to shape society.
In contrast, the last few years have seen two developments - one
social and one scientific - which in their turn could
change the face of sperm warfare. The social development
was the emergence of child support agencies as governments
tried to shift financial responsibility for the children of women
without partners away from society and on to the absent father.
Interestingly, in their attempts to avoid or defer their support,
men everywhere have responded by invoking sperm warfare -
expressing doubts about their paternity of this or that child.
In the past, most such claims of non-paternity would have
remained unresolved. However, the scientific development -
genetic fingerprinting - has provided a relatively conclusive
method of testing such claims (Scenes 16 and 30).
360 361SPERM WARS FINAL SCORE
It is interesting to speculate how a world of child support
agencies and paternity tests might change sexual strategy and the
role of sperm warfare.
The main repercussions are twofold. First, men will find it more
difficult to have sex and run (Scenes 13 and 29). No longer will it
be as easy to deny paternity and leave child-raising to the woman.
Secondly, women will find it much more difficult to trick men into
raising children who are not theirs (Scenes 6, 8, 13, 16, 17, 18, 26,
31, 33 and 35). It is not difficult to envisage a future in which men
will routinely pay for (or even be entitled to!) a paternity test at the
birth of each child they may be legally forced to support.
Although these two ancient strategies will become much less
successful, alternative strategies, uncommon today, will become
more successful. For example, women will become much freer to
have children by several men. Not only might they gain
genetically, they might also gain from obtaining long-term
financial support from a number of men (Scene 18). In the process
of having children by several men, women should still seek to
promote sperm warfare so that their male descendants will have
competitive ejaculates (Scene 21). But no longer need women risk
dependence on meager support from the state as a result of their
strategy. They will, of course, find it more difficult, if not
impossible, to hide their actions from any partner, but then they
will have less need to do so. In fact, they will have less need for a
partner at all. Even if they have a partner, his desertion need not be
as crippling as in the past. In their turn, men could exploit this
potential earning power of women. No longer need they fear being
tricked into raising another man's child - if they take on such a
child it will be knowingly, having judged that they have more to
gain than to lose (Scene 15). Often, they may even calculate that
the extra income their partner could generate through having other
men's children could actually help them to raise their own children
more successfully.
Although such behavior by men and women could make longterm relationships less common - and will certainly change
362
their nature - such relationships will probably still happen. Men
will still try to avoid sperm warfare by guarding a mate (Scene 9)
and women will still try to recruit a partner to help with all the
other, non-financial, aspects of raising their children (Scene 18).
But the financial arrangements for child-raising and the ability to
identify paternity could well shorten such relationships, removing
as they do two of their main functions. The reproductive life of
both men and women will centre on a succession of relationships,
each lasting just long enough to produce one or two children.
As far as men are concerned, the balance of reproductive
success is likely to swing even more strongly in favor of those of
wealth and status than at present (Scene 18) - subconsciously, this
may even be why child support legislation appeals to the lawmakers! Only wealthy men will be able to afford to have children
with a number of women, and hence only such men will be
targeted by many women. Poorer men, when they do get a chance
to inseminate extra women, will be under pressure to make
themselves even more untraceable than at present.
Some things, of course, will never change. Nothing - short of
castration, brain surgery or hormone implants - can remove a
person's subconscious urge to have as many grandchildren as they
can. So, nothing will remove a man's subconscious urge to have as
many children with as many women as his genes and
circumstances will allow. Similarly, nothing will prevent a woman
from subconsciously trying to collect the best genes and recruit the
best support for her children that her genes and circumstances will
allow.
The coercive 'one-family, one-child' legislation in China has
neatly highlighted how basic reproductive strategies adapt to
social change. The legislation has successfully reduced the mean
number of children (to 1.6 per woman). But in so doing it has also
changed the sex ratio (through selective abortion and infanticide -
Scene 16) to 1.6 boys for every girl. Why? Intrinsically, the
coercion impinges more on a woman's potential reproductive
success than a man's. A successful man
363(such as those who conceived and imposed the legislation?) can still
have many children if he can surreptitiously inseminate many women
and win sperm warfare. In contrast, the only way a woman can
generate more grandchildren than her contemporaries is by having
such a successful son. A man also, of course, benefits reproductively
from fathering a successful son. Whatever people's conscious reasons
for wanting sons so badly in modern China that they are prepared to
kill their daughters, their biological response is precisely what would
be expected if they were trying to enhance their reproductive success.
All of the sexual strategies described in this book will adapt to any
new environment. Whatever the effect on society of future scientific
and social developments, sperm warfare and its associated behavior
seem destined to be an ever-present feature. As such, it will continue
to be the major force in the shaping of human sexuality over the
generations to come.