Indeed, so hackneyed is this scenario that there is a danger, if we
are not careful, of missing the important point: namely, that the
behaviour has become hackneyed precisely because it is so common.
As such, it plays an important role in the promotion of sperm warfare
— and hence in the paternity of children conceived via such warfare.
Why should the woman in the scene, and so many like her, suddenly
throw herself at two male visitors to her home? What is the
significance of the saga of her contraceptive pills? And how did she
benefit from her behaviour in terms of reproductive success?
When this scene began, the woman genuinely believed that she
didn't want another child. In order to prevent conception, she was
taking the pill and, when necessary, making doubly sure by forcing
her partner to use a condom. Then, in the midst of what, sexually,
was the most active week of her life, she 'forgot' to take contraceptive
precautions. Was this lapse of memory really a mistake, or was it a
subconscious strategy? And was it yet another example of a 'failure'
destined actually to increase a woman's reproductive success? What
this woman's body had really decided was that it didn't want another
child by her partner. Her brain was then simply coerced into finding a
convincing reason why they, as a couple, should avoid conception.
That reason was so convincing, she even managed to persuade herself
that she wanted to go back to work.
In her eyes, her partner had decreased in stature over the years. He
had failed to live up to the potential he had shown when she
committed her first two children to his genes. Now his health also was
failing, and he was proving less than robust. As far as she was
concerned, he had no saving graces in terms of intellect or character,
either. In effect, her body had decided that a third child should be
fathered by somebody with signs of a more robust genetic constitution
than him. So when the opportunity presented itself, her body made
sure that she took full advantage.
A woman is less likely to use contraception when she has sex with
somebody other than her partner. And it is not always because the
circumstances surrounding the infidelity make the use of
contraception difficult. The first time the woman in Scene 17 had sex
with her partner's boss or with the window-cleaner, it would have
been difficult to insist on their wearing a condom. But on subsequent
occasions she, and they, could have been better prepared — but they
weren't. In any case, she wasn't dependent on these men and on
condoms. Had she taken her pill at the appropriate time, she could still
have avoided conception. But she forgot. Was it really an accident, a
genuine lapse of memory? Or did her body subconsciously manipulate
her into forgetting, so that she conceived to a man other than her
partner?
The sudden but week-long surge of sexual excitement the woman
experienced was the outward manifestation of hormones produced
during her fertile period. We have already discussed (Scene 6) how
women become more interested in infidelity at this time. Her sudden
loss of sexual interest at the end of her week of infidelity marked the
end of her fertile period and, as it happened, the beginning of her
pregnancy. By the time her partner returned and accepted an
unprotected intercourse as a coming-home present, the woman will
already have been two weeks pregnant.
Women, like most female animals that hide the fertile phase of
their menstrual cycle, continue to have intercourse well into
pregnancy. This is the final touch by which they can confuse the
128 129
MSPERM WARS SUCCESSFUL FAILURE
males around them. If a woman lost interest in sex as soon as she
conceived, it would be a clear signal to the males around her that
conception had occurred. This would allow each of them to make
some assessment of who could and could not be the genetic father.
Continuing intercourse well into pregnancy guarantees the ultimate
confusion of all potential fathers. This explains why our main
character was keen to have unprotected intercourse with her partner
on his return. It meant that in his eyes, and even in hers, he could have
been the father of her third child, even though he wasn't.
Given such a short-lived and ideal opportunity for undetected
infidelity, the woman's body made a shrewd move in collecting sperm
from more than one man. She gained two benefits. First, she halved
her chances of being unlucky enough to collect sperm from a man
who just happened to be infertile (10 per cent of men, largely due to
sexually transmitted disease — Scene 11), despite appearing to be a
suitable genetic father (Scene 18). But secondly, by putting two men's
armies into competition, she increased her chances of being fertilised
by an ejaculate competent at sperm warfare (Scenes 6 and 21). She
might never again have such a perfect opportunity to conceive a child
with better genes than her partner could provide — not without
leaving him, anyway. We do not know which of the two competitors
was actually the father, but whichever he was, he was the man who
won the sperm war she had promoted.
When a woman has sex with two men over a short period of time,
she has three ways of influencing which of them fathers any child that
may result. First, she can have sex with one of the men at a more
fertile phase of her menstrual cycle (Scene 6). Secondly, she can
retain a larger sperm army from one of the males (Scenes 22 to 26).
Thirdly, like the woman in Scene 17, she can use modern
contraceptive techniques.
If a woman uses a barrier method, such as cap or condom, with one
man but not the other, she can prevent the former from entering sperm
into warfare at all. Alternatively, by using the pill and then not using
the pill, like the woman in the scene,
she can influence which man's sperm is most likely to have access to
an egg. Indeed, our main character made full use of modern
contraception in ensuring that she did not conceive via her partner.
The other two men, however, were given equal chances. All they had
to do was win a sperm war.
As we discussed in Scene 16, modern contraception may not have
much influence on how many children a woman has in her lifetime.
But it has provided her with a powerful and efficient tool with which
to enhance her natural ability to time when and via whom she
conceives. Rarely is contraception technology used in this way
consciously. But in the hands of a woman's urges it is a powerful new
weapon by which she can increase her reproductive success.
130 131CHAPTER SEVEN
Shopping Around
for Genes
Scene 18
Spoilt for Choice
Despite the open windows, the room was hot and humid. The naked
woman moved slowly off the bed so as not to wake the young man
sprawled next to her. Without dressing, she walked downstairs,
through the open french windows, and into the bright sunlight. The
tiles of the patio were hot to her feet. She paused for a second, then
ran a few steps and dived into the large swimming pool. The blissfully
cool water washed the remnants of her recent intercourse from her
thighs and pubic hair and, as she swam the length of the pool, carried
away her flowback.
She had been in the water about ten minutes when the young man
she had left on her bed appeared on the patio. She watched his naked,
tanned and muscular body run across the hot tiles and dive not quite
perfectly into the water. He swam strongly over to her, trod water by
her side, then kissed her. After a few minutes together, enjoying the
water, she asked him to go. Without argument, he swam back across
the pool, pulled himself out of the water, and disappeared into the
house to shower and dress.
The woman also left the pool. She dried herself with a towel
hanging from the pool-side lounger, then walked down the steps on to
the lawn, relishing the coolness of the grass beneath her
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
feet. There was no danger of her nakedness being seen. The garden
was so large, the bordering trees and security fencing so high and the
neighbours so far away, that her privacy was complete. When the
young man appeared at the french windows to shout his farewell, she
was on her way back to the patio. She felt like a Greek statue as she
stood in the middle of the lawn and waved goodbye. For a woman only
months from her fortieth birthday and with three children, one now in
her mid-twenties, her body was in impressive shape.
As the young man turned to leave, she walked back to the patio. In
five years, he was probably her best find yet. Her advertisement was
simple but effective: 'Part-time gardener required to maintain large
garden over summer. Ideal for student during summer vacation'. Each
year she had interviewed over twenty applicants. Her choice was
based on the student's looks, intelligence, maturity, self-confidence
and sexual aura. She took it as testimony to her own good looks and
judgment that it had never taken her more than a fortnight to seduce
any of her choices. The result was that for two days a week, over
about three months each summer, she had the sexual companionship
of a young man nearly twenty years her junior. And she had her lawn
mowed and her garden weeded.
This year she had hired two men, both medical students, whom she
had found equally attractive. One worked on Tuesdays, the other
Fridays. As she stretched out in the sun on the lounger, she toyed once
again with the fantasy of having both young men in bed with her at
the same time. But that was for the future. As she drifted in and out of
a sun-drenched sleep, she reflected on the events that had given her
such a good life.
It all began on her fourteenth birthday. She had been out with her
mother, shopping around for a new pair of jeans. It was a freezing
cold winter's day, and while they were shopping it had started to snow.
The town was a forty-five-minute bus ride away from their home, even
on a good day. By the time they arrived at the bus stop, the snow was
settling fast. The bus never came. But the man in the large and very
expensive car did.
132 133SPERM WARS
He wasn't really a stranger. When he wasn't at his apartment in the
city, he lived in a virtual mansion in their home village. Her father
worked for him as a gardener cum handyman, helping to maintain his
house and its grounds. Although for years she had seen him driving
around, she had never really met him before. All she knew was that
he was about fifty years old, very rich, and apparently had no
children, despite having lived with the same woman for about twenty
years. She had heard her parents talk about infidelity and children by
other women. She had also heard them talk about infertility and
women's problems, but had taken little interest.
On the journey home she had been struck by his friendliness. At
fourteen, she was well developed and already attractive, with a
maturity and self-confidence that would have graced a twenty-yearold. During the journey, she found herself doing most of the talking.
She liked and felt comfortable with this man and had no hesitation, a
week later, in accepting another lift from him when he drove past her
at the school bus stop. After that, he drove her home with increasing
frequency. Her schoolfriends teased her a bit about it, but it didn't
bother her.
The following summer, during the long vacation, she lost her
virginity. Her lover was a boy of seventeen whom she and her friends
had worshipped from a distance for months. After the trauma of their
first intercourse, she began to enjoy their sexual activities. She
became the envy of her friends as she described in great, though
sometimes imaginary, detail her sexual adventures with this young
idol.
That autumn, she resumed her journeys home from school with her
father's employer. She was in his car the day before his partner was
diagnosed as having terminal cancer. After that, she didn't see him for
several months as he and his partner moved to the city for her to be
treated. He did not reappear until a few weeks after his partner's death
which, she discovered later, had been the day after her fifteenth
birthday. From then on, whenever he wasn't in the city on business,
he made a point of picking her up from school. Soon, they
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
actually discussed which days he could do so, and she would wait for
him.
Winter cut down on the sexual activity with her boyfriend until he
passed his driving test and acquired a virtually derelict car. Then, they
became adept at cramped sex on the cold and badly sprung back seat.
She began to fantasise about doing the same with her father's employer
in the luxury of his car. It would be like being in bed. Now, stretched
out in the sun by the side of her swimming pool, the woman still
remembered clearly the move that changed her life. On their way
home from school, waiting at traffic lights, she had put her hand on
his thigh and leaned across to kiss him on the cheek.
They never did have sex in his car. But within a week of that kiss
she was in his bed, experiencing for the first time the difference
between sex with a man of fifty and sex with a boy of seventeen.
Throughout that spring and summer she had sex at least twice a week,
more or less alternately with her boyfriend and the older man. Neither
knew of the other's existence. It was autumn before she and her mother
realised she was three months pregnant.
She refused to discuss paternity with anyone except her parents and
her father's employer. Her parents were told that the father was the
young boyfriend who had just left for college and whose parents had
now moved out of the area. Her father's employer was told that the
baby was his, as well it might have been. He feared conviction for
having sex with a fifteen-year-old girl. But he also felt genuine affection
for her and for the child he believed was his. Explaining to her parents
that he would do the same for any employee who was in trouble, he
offered to help with the child's upkeep. On the strength of this extra
income, her parents volunteered to look after the child, a girl, while
their daughter finished her education.
When, despite the distractions of motherhood, she performed well
in her examinations, the man again offered to help. This time he
provided money for her to have a college education. During her two
and a bit years at college, she had about ten
134 135SPERM WARS
different sexual partners. Even so, twice a term she would arrange to
meet her benefactor at his city apartment for a weekend of sex and a
taste of the high life.
She never did graduate. In her third year, faced with a choice
between months of hard revision and a tempting offer from her
benefactor, she left college. They travelled extensively for a few
months and then, on their return, began to live together with the
daughter, now aged six. At her urging, he sold his mansion and
bought the wonderful house in which she now lived. They spent nearly
ten years together in comfort and luxury, travelling the world, and
mixing with equally wealthy people. They also had a further two
children, both boys.
All three of the woman's children were raised by nannies, sent to
boarding school, and spent very little time at home. Her partner was
without doubt the father of her elder son, but she could not be sure
who was the father of the younger one. It could have been her partner,
but it could equally have been the politician with whom she had sex
every day for a week at about the relevant time. Moreover, if he had
been a month later taking her to bed, so too might have been the
surgeon, a family friend who had treated her predecessor for cancer.
Her partner lived just long enough to see the younger son's eighth
birthday. Then, aged sixty-five, he died of a heart attack. That was ten
years ago. She inherited the house and more than enough money to
live very comfortably — she continued to pay for her children's
education, travelled when she wanted and indulged in occasional
luxuries, like young gardeners. After her partner's death, there had
been no shortage of men eager to share her life. Many were widowed
or separated and most were rich. She was rarely without a sexual
partner, and often successive partners overlapped. However, she
stubbornly refused to allow anybody to live with her permanently.
Besides, she was increasingly attracted to struggling young men, full
of drive and ambition, rather than to men saddled with the
complacency of success or inheritance.
Her daughter, now aged twenty-five and living abroad with
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
her partner, had just announced her first pregnancy. Her sons, aged
eighteen and nineteen, were both at college studying medicine. She
took great pride in all her children, particularly her sons — not
because of what she had done for them, which in truth was very little,
but for what they were and for what they had done for themselves. The
boys were very different from each other, perhaps reflecting a
different paternity. But they were both good-looking and intelligent,
precociously mature and confident, yet still gentle and caring. She had
no doubt they were going to break many a girl's heart.
Earlier, in their mid-teens, they had been in the habit of bringing
home friends from school to stay for a while during the vacations.
Many a young boy had been shocked and embarrassed at the family's
practice of swimming naked together in the pool. In two weeks' time,
her sons would begin their summer vacation. This time they would stay
with her for only a week before travelling abroad, and, moreover, they
were bringing girls with them, not boys. Mischievously, the woman
wondered if they would swim naked with her this summer — and, if
they did, whether their girlfriends would join them.
She got up off the lounger and sauntered across the patio, dragging
her towel behind her. It was time to shower and dress so as to be ready
for her evening's escort. As she made her way indoors, she enjoyed yet
again the thought that for a gardener's daughter she had done rather
well.
n congratulating herself on her life, the woman in this scene was of
course measuring her success on a hedonistic scale. By her own
and probably most other people's yardsticks, she had indeed done
'rather well'. And even on a biological scale, she had done rather well.
Few factors have more influence on a person's reproductive success
than their selection of a mate or mates. Yet mate selection is complex,
particularly for a woman. More often than not she has to compromise
in many different ways. The scene we
136 137
ISPERM WARS
have just witnessed is the first of four in which we shall explore two
matters — the problems that people, particularly women, face when
selecting a mate; and the methods they employ in solving those
problems.
Here the central character successfully cleared all of the obstacles
to reproductive success that women normally encounter when
choosing a mate. First, through her choice of long-term partner, she
engineered an environment conducive to the easy and successful
raising of children (from the point of view of being in a position to
offer them every opportunity, anyway). Secondly, she managed to
collect some of the most sought-after male genes in her vicinity. As
a result, she produced children with the looks and ability to make the
most of the comfortable environment into which they were born. Her
strategy was risky, but innate ability was on her side. She made the
most of her daring and cunning, her composure and good looks, and
successfully walked the tightrope of disease, discovery and
desertion.
In choosing a man or men with whom to share her life, a woman
has two major issues to consider. On the one hand, she needs a man
who can help her raise her children. On the other, she needs genes
that in combination with her own will produce attractive, fertile and
successful children. The better the environment and the better the
assistance, the more fully each child will achieve his or her genetic
potential.
A woman's difficulty is that she has a much wider choice of men
to provide her with genes than she has of long-term partners. She
could probably persuade many men of her choice to give her their
genes — it takes only a few minutes of sex, after all. Her options for
a long-term partner, though, are much more limited. Most men in
most societies have not the time, the energy nor the resources to help
support more than one woman and her children at any one time. Her
choice of long-term partner is therefore restricted to those men who
are unattached, ready to desert their current partner, or who have so
much time, energy or wealth that they can support more than one
family.
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
An equally difficult problem is to identify which of the few
available men would make the best long-term partner. The most
reliable way would be to look at past performance, but inevitably the
best long-term partners are already paired to other women. Much of
the woman's choice, therefore, is limited to young and unattached
men who have not yet proved themselves as long-term partners. All
she can do is look for signs of potential, and hope that her judgment
is accurate.
Surveys of many cultures around the world consistently show that,
in looking for a long-term partner, women prefer men who have, or
have the potential of, wealth, status, stability and durability. In the
past, in all cultures, the children of women paired to men at the top of
the scale for these qualities had a far greater chance of survival,
health and subsequent fecundity. The same holds true even in today's
industrialised societies.
The preferences are clear, but for most women a level of
compromise is necessary. One man may be wealthy but uncaring;
another may be of high status but unstable; yet another may be poor,
but stable and caring. So, inevitably, a woman has to opt for the best
compromise. Of course, she does not have to stay with her first
partner. Again, studies show that when a woman leaves one partner
for another, she invariably moves up the scale to a better
compromise.
In choosing a man to help raise her children, a woman is only
secondarily impressed by looks, whereas in choosing a short-term
partner for sex, looks are much more important. The features she
finds most attractive are clear eyes, healthy skin and hair, firm
buttocks, a waist that is about the same in circumference as his hips,
shapely legs, broad shoulders, quick wit and intelligence. She is also
attracted by symmetry in his physical features. These various
qualities are all reasonably reliable indicators of genetic health,
fertility and competitiveness. As such, they imply a genetic
constitution that would also be desirable in her children.
Since women are seeking different attributes in short-term and
long-term partners, but have more choice of short-term
138 139SPERM WARS
they may again have to compromise. They have two main options.
They can choose the best available long-term partner, and then rely
on infidelity to obtain the best genes. This can succeed, but only if
they successfully avoid the disadvantages of infidelity that we have
already discussed (Scenes 8 to 11). Alternatively, they can choose a
man who, although neither the best provider of genes nor the best
partner, is at least the best available compromise.
As we have found in so many aspects of reproductive success,
women's behaviour and experience are mirrored by other animals. In
this instance, women are not the only females who have to trade off
between male support and male genes. One of the most revealing
studies of the problem concerns a bird, the blue tit. The females of
this species show all of the behaviour we have just described for
women. Those lucky ones paired to genetically superior males with
the best territories are totally faithful. Neighbouring females, paired
to genetically inferior males, take every opportunity to seek infidelity
with the superior males. They sneak into the better males' territories,
solicit intercourse, then return unobserved to the partner they have
just cheated. On average, about a third of young birds in a nest have
not been sired by their mother's partner. Actual levels range from 0
per cent in the nests of the most favoured males to about 80 per cent
in the nests of the least favoured ones.
A surprisingly similar pattern is found in humans. On average,
about 10 per cent of children are not sired by their supposed father.
Some men, however, have a higher chance of being deceived in this
way than others — and it is those of low wealth and status who fare
worst. Actual figures range from 1 per cent in high-status areas of
Switzerland and the USA, through 5-6 per cent for moderate-status
males in Britain and the USA, to 10-30 per cent for lower-status
males in Britain, France and the USA. Moreover, the men most
likely to sexually hoodwink the lower-status males are men of higher
status. Anthropological studies have shown precisely the same
pattern. Men of higher wealth and status obtain partners earlier,
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
start to reproduce earlier, are less likely to have their partners
impregnated by other men and are more likely to do exactly that to
other males. So in all ways, men of wealth and status have the
potential to be reproductively more successful than their lower-status
contemporaries.
Returning to birds — it is rare, unless the male is infertile, for all
of the young in 'his' nest to have been sired by other males. It is as if
the female always gives her partner some chance of paternity so as to
retain his help in paternal care. The same may be true for humans.
Moreover, when we look at which children are most likely to belong
to their partner, women show a clear pattern. As with the woman in
Scene 18, the child most likely to have been sired by a woman's
partner is the second; the children least likely are the first, and
particularly the last. The reasons, though, are slightly different for
first and last.
Often, a woman is already pregnant when she settles down with a
long-term partner, and occasionally this partner is not the father of
her child. Sometimes he knows this and takes on the woman and her
child anyway (Scene 15), for reasons we have discussed (Scene 9),
but sometimes he doesn't know. The woman is least likely to be
unfaithful in the weeks or months preceding the conception of her
second child. Subsequent children, however, are more and more
likely to be the product of infidelity.
Identifying the best partners and the best providers of genes, then
pursuing the best available compromise, is only one aspect of a
woman's problem in obtaining a mate. Having selected him, she then
has to recruit him into the chosen role. She can do this only if the
man finds her attractive enough. If she cannot attract her first choice,
she then has to compromise yet again. The man she finally recruits
will be the best compromise among those she wants and those she
can attract. The woman in Scene 18 was successful because a rich
and successful man, thirty-five years older than herself, picked her
out from the crowd. Then, without her infidelity being detected, she
set about collecting genes from other successful men. She succeeded
once again because these
140 141SPERM WARS
men considered sex with her to be worth the risk. In short, she
succeeded because she was attractive to men, both as a partner and as
a lover.
So, what was it about this woman that men found so attractive?
What criteria do men use in choosing partners and lovers, and how do
these criteria differ from those used by women?
Basically, men select women for their health, fertility and fidelity
— though not consciously, of course. On seeing a woman, men do not
immediately remark on her potential for bearing and raising children.
Nevertheless, the features that men's bodies are programmed to find
attractive are precisely those that do reflect this potential. Unlike a
woman, a man uses similar criteria whether he is selecting a partner or
a lover — for both, his primary concern is with looks and behaviour.
An important feature is body shape, particularly the ratio of waist to
hip. Irrespective of whether a woman is thin or fat, men prefer
someone whose waist measurement is about 70 per cent of her hip
measurement. This preference is remarkably constant both throughout
history (to judge from statues, paintings and 'girlie' magazines) and
from culture to culture (to judge from rock-paintings and figurines). In
some cultures, men prefer thin women; in others, fat. But in all
cultures, they prefer women with waists significantly narrower than
their buttocks. The explanation is that this shape reflects a good
hormone balance, good resistance to disease and good fertility.
In addition to shape, men all over the world also respond strongly
to clear eyes, healthy hair and skin, and the shape of the face,
particularly its symmetry. Again, these features are strong indicators
of health and hence fertility. Men of most cultures also respond to
breast size and shape, though actual preferences vary and there is no
simple link between the appearance of a woman's breasts and her
ability to lactate and sustain a child. Finally, men respond strongly to
certain character traits, such as meekness and dependence, that might
indicate potential fidelity. Such traits, though, are relatively easy to
fake, at least for short periods.
There is another difference in mate preference between men
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
and women. As long-term partners, women tend to prefer men who
are older than themselves. Such men have had more time to prove
themselves and more chance to amass the resources a woman will
need to sustain any children she may have. Unless he is very wealthy,
however, a man older than about fifty becomes less and less attractive
to a younger, still fertile, woman — because of the increasing risk
that he might die before any children she has with him become
independent.
Men, on the other hand, prefer females who are old enough to be
fertile, but still have most of their reproductive lives ahead of them.
This way, they get more children from their investment. Whether a
man is twenty or seventy, therefore, his preferred age for a new
partner is about twenty, or even younger. Hence the frequency with
which the most successful of men leave their middle-aged partner and
their first family to set up home and begin a second family with a
much younger woman.
An older but still fertile woman might also gain from a liaison with
a younger man. This is because she can judge a man's physical quality
more easily when he is at his physical peak. But more often than not
such a man is in no position to maintain an older woman, let alone her
existing children and any new children their liaison might produce.
Consequently, older women are most likely to target young men for
acts of infidelity from within a secure long-term partnership, and are
less likely to choose them as long-term partners.
The woman in Scene 18 had been freed from constraints by her
personal wealth. She could have invited any of her 'gardeners' to live
with her for a while and perhaps give her another child — they had
all been carefully chosen for their genetic potential. She could
undoubtedly have raised another child by such a man without
prejudicing either her own health or the success of her existing
children and future grandchildren. Nor need she have short-changed
her new child. By the time we left the scene, the woman had not
followed this course, but she still had time to do so. Many rich
women do.
Finally, once a woman is post-reproductive or once a man
142 143SPERM WARS
has ceased to be able to attract younger, fertile women (Scene 11), their
criteria for mate choice change. Choice of a long-term partner can still
influence their reproductive success, but now of course it is not via any
children that they might produce together. It is instead via its effect on
the survival and reproduction of any children they each may already
have from a previous relationship (Scene 11). Wealth, status and the
potential to be a good stepparent or stepgrandparent now become of
primary importance to both sexes in their choice of a partner. All the
same, most people still have to compromise.
We can see quite clearly that nowhere is the conflict of interests
between males and females greater than in the selection and
recruitment of a partner — at any age. Everybody is seeking the best
partner in their preferred category, but may not themselves match up to
that chosen person's preferences. Competition is fierce. Everything is
compromise, and time is limited. If a person settles too readily for a
poor compromise, they may miss the chance of a much better
compromise later. However, spending too long in search of the best
compromise can be equally disadvantageous. He or she may then pay
the price of having to settle for a worse compromise, or even of failing
to attract anybody at all. The best prizes go to the people who judge
correctly when to continue their search and when to settle for what they
can get — if only for the time being.
There is a fascinating consequence of the criteria women use for
mate selection — particularly their preference for, and greater fidelity
to, men of wealth and status. The sons of such men achieve greater
reproductive success than their lower-status contemporaries. They do
this not only through their long-term relationships, but also because
they have the same above-average opportunities to sire children with
the partners of other men as did their fathers. It follows from this that a
woman paired to such a man will achieve greater reproductive success
if she produces sons than if she produces daughters.
The greatest number of children ever claimed by a man is 888 (by an
ex-emperor of Morocco); that by a woman, sixty-nine
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
(over twenty-seven pregnancies). And even at a more mundane level it
is much easier for a man, potentially, to have more children than a
woman — for the obvious reason that whereas a man can have his
children with several different women, a woman (until the recent
advent of surrogate motherhood) has had to have all her children
herself. A successful son, therefore, can give a woman far more
grandchildren than can a successful daughter. The higher a son's
eventual social status, the more successful he is likely to be. Since
wealth and status, as well as the genetic potential to achieve wealth and
status, can be inherited, we might expect higher-status couples to
produce more sons than lower-status couples — and they do. Studies
around the world have shown a male-biased sex ratio among the
children of couples of higher status (take, as an example, the children
of the men and women listed in the national Who's Who). Usually the
bias is statistical rather than obvious — about 115 boys for every 100
girls — but sometimes it can be impressive. The presidents of the
United States, for example, have between them produced ninety sons
and sixty-one daughters, the equivalent of 148 sons for every 100
daughters.
So why don't all women produce an excess of sons? Actually, to
some extent they do. On average, about 106 boys are born for every
100 girls. But because boys are more likely to die during childhood, by
the time the survivors start to reproduce the proportion is about equal.
Even so, not only is the average woman less likely to have a boy than a
woman paired to a high-status male, but women paired to low-status
males and women without a partner at all are more likely to produce a
daughter. Why?
The answer is that a son is a much more precarious reproductive
option than a daughter. Despite his potential to produce large numbers,
he is more likely to die before he begins to reproduce, and he has
much more chance of not reproducing at all, even when he tries. If
they are not reproductively competitive, sons are a poor option.
Imagine a society in which all women produce only two children: for
every man
144 145SPERM WARS
who sires six children with three different women, there will be two
who fail to sire any. There are two ways in which a daughter is the
safer option: first, although relatively few daughters produce large
numbers of grandchildren for their mothers, relatively few fail to
produce any; second, a mother can be certain that all of the
grandchildren produced through a daughter are hers. She cannot be so
certain about the grandchildren apparently produced by a son.
Thus, only when there is a very good chance that a son will not
only survive but will also be reproductively competitive against other
males is it worth producing a boy. So, in principle, we should not be
surprised to find that women without long-term partners and women
paired to lower-status males produce an excess of daughters — or to
find that those paired to higher-status males produce an excess of
sons. Nor should we be surprised that, in between these two extremes,
most women compromise and show no bias towards either sex.
The woman in Scene 18 got it exactly right when she produced a
daughter from her 'accident' while she was still at school, and two sons
when she was paired to a wealthy man of high status. Just how she will
have achieved this bias is not known. The explanation is not that
higher-status males produce an excess of 'male' sperm — the casual
lovers of such men produce an excess of daughters, as they should.
Nor does it seem likely that high-status males introduce an excess of
'male' sperm into their partners but an excess of 'female' sperm into
their lovers. The only reasonable explanation is that the bias is
generated by the woman. Either her body biases the proportion of male
and female sperm allowed through to the fertilisation zone in her
oviducts, or she is selective about which embryos she allows to
implant following fertilisation. Maybe, if the embryo is the 'wrong' sex
for her circumstances, her womb does not let it implant (Scene 16).
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
To most people, the whole process of mate selection is a minefield
of distractions and pitfalls, particularly during late adolescence as a
boy or girl searches for their first long-term partner. The woman in
our scene subconsciously wove her way through this minefield with
precision. She did so by virtue of the excellent genes she herself had
received from her parents. As a result, she ended up with three
children, and perhaps eventually more, all sired by a man or men who
were reproductively outstanding in their peer group. Her daughter had
already begun to produce grandchildren; her sons had great potential,
not only to produce their own families but also to be the targets of
other women's infidelities. She had every indication that her
descendants would multiply and flourish. In later generations, her
genes would mark more of the population than would the genes of her
less successful contemporaries. Her life had been a success — both
biologically and hedonistically.
SCENE 19
Fair Exchange
It was Saturday night and the two couples were sitting cross-legged in
a circle on the floor. With plenty to drink by their sides, they began to
play cards. Each of them was privately tingling with nervous and
sexual excitement. They had great hopes that the next hour would be a
sexual landmark in all of their lives.
They had known each other for seven years. Although they had
always found each other's partner sexually attractive, no infidelity had
ever occurred. The first couple, despite five years of unprotected sex,
had no children. The second couple had two. In recent years, for
different reasons, each couple's relationship had been foundering.
146 147SPERM WARS
The childless couple felt an undeniable emptiness in their lives,
which they could not shake off despite all their money and travelling.
When they first met, they had seemed perfect for each other. He was
tall, muscular, ambitious, witty and dominating. She was effervescent,
open and liberated, always dressing provocatively. Women surrounded
him wherever he went and he could have had a new sex partner every
week if he had wished — and he did . . . often. She, also, was much
sought after. Once regarded as an item, they gained great kudos from
being each other's partner and, despite their earlier promiscuities, had
settled into a serious relationship.
Four years later, after a year of unprotected sex, they had been
screened for infertility but there was no clear indication that either was
infertile. She was ovulating, had no blocked tubes and seemed normal.
He was producing rather large numbers of sperm, but otherwise also
seemed normal.
At first, they responded to their problem with intense sexual
activity, but after a further year of failure they gradually lost interest in
routine sex. Secretly, they both hoped their combined failure was the
other's fault, and this thought had led them to be critical of each other's
sexuality. She now saw his size and power as futile, boorish and
selfish. He now saw her free conversation and provocative dress sense
as public vulgarity, a front to hide her private frigidity.
The couple with children were very different. Both were attractive
in their own way, but were much less extrovert than their friends.
What little social kudos they had came from their association with the
childless couple. The man was small, quiet, hard-working and reliable.
The woman was demure, sympathetic and maternal. It had taken them
eight months of effort to conceive each of their two children but
eventually it had happened and, as a parental team, they were
wonderful. When he was not working they were hardly ever out of
each other's company.
Lately, however, increasing financial hardship had produced
friction between them. Their situation had been aggravated
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
when his employers, dismayed by his lack of ambition and charisma,
moved him sideways to a lower-profile position. Now, increasingly
frustrated by her partner's mundane job, she was often critical of his
inability to improve their situation. For his part, having pushed his
partner into full-time motherhood, he now found her demure quietness
dull and unattractive.
Recently, each couple had sought to bolster their flagging sexual
interest with pornography. But over the weeks the impact of the
images had worn off. Then, when the four of them started to watch
films together, excitement had been briefly rekindled. Even that
source of excitement, though, had eventually begun to wane — until
tonight. The idea for the 'game' they were about to play had been
seeded by a film showing partner-swapping. In the video they had just
watched, the men had thrown their car keys into a pile in the centre of
the room. The women chose a key, then paired off with the owner.
Soon the room was full of naked, copulating bodies.
It was the childless woman who with typical brashness had
suggested they should try swapping. At first they all treated the
suggestion as a joke, but as they became increasingly drunk they
began to talk about the possibility seriously. Soon they were
discussing the practicalities of the exercise rather than its desirability.
They devised a card game, based on chance, not strategy, that
required the winner to remove an item of clothing. It was decreed that
the man who was the first to lose all his clothes should have sex with
the woman who lost all hers first.
A run of wins left the smaller of the two men naked almost before
the others had started. He was far from muscular and had relatively
tiny testes, but his penis was larger than average. As he settled back to
watch the two women progressively expose more and more of their
femininity, he became increasingly proud of his erection. In the event,
the cards were disappointing. In a late run, it was his partner who was
next to be naked. As she
148 149SPERM WARS
removed her knickers, she both surprised and excited the other couple
by revealing a triangle of pubic hair that struck them as incongruously
large for such a demure woman. An immediate suggestion that the
rules should be changed so that partners did not have sex with each
other was defeated by the alternative idea that they should still have
sex, but in full view of the other couple.
Less exhibitionist than their friends, the 'lucky' couple found it
difficult to begin their performance. Laughter, self-consciousness and
a rapidly dwindling erection almost ended the enterprise. Eventually, as
they lay together, it was the serious stroking and kissing of their bodies
by the other couple that took them across the threshold from
embarrassment to intense sexual arousal. The intercourse they had,
while still being caressed by the other couple, was the most exciting
either had ever experienced.
Aroused almost to the point of spontaneous ejaculation by what he
had just seen, the childless man suggested they should abandon the
cards. He should now have sex with the already naked and prostrate
woman rather than with his own partner. Almost before anybody could
comment, he was on top of her. The woman was to relive this moment
many times over the next few years. The emotion she was always to
remember as she felt him, penis even larger than her partner's, slip
gently into her was neither guilt nor excitement. It was instead an
overwhelming sense of welcome. Excitement followed but was shortlived. He had been so aroused that he ejaculated within seconds.
All now naked, there followed a crude and drunken interlude of
about half an hour while they first waited for, then tried to help, the
first man to recover his erection. The childless woman, who had
perhaps wanted all this to happen more than any of them, began to fret
that she would not have her turn. The pressure on the first man was
intense but eventually the prospect of sex with a different woman,
combined with the now totally abandoned sexual encouragement he
received
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
from both women, did the trick. At the childless woman's suggestion,
he entered her from behind as she knelt down, bending forward over a
chair. Watching his partner have sex with another man excited the
childless man once more. He could scarcely wait for his friend to
withdraw before taking over.
They never repeated the exercise. A month later, both women
discovered they were pregnant. They both assumed that the father of
their children was the one who had already proved his fertility. But
they were quite wrong. The father of both was the one who had
previously seemed infertile.
The couples were to stay together for another five years. For a
while, until after their babies were born, both relationships stabilised.
As the children grew, however, both relationships once more
deteriorated. Despite continuing to have unprotected sex, the extrovert
couple failed to produce another child and their mutual recriminations
intensified. The man began an affair with the other woman. This time,
they kept it secret. Eventually, though, they confessed their infidelity,
both couples separated, and the unfaithful pair began to live together,
along with the woman's three children.
Financially, the more extrovert man's life went from success to
success and he was able to maintain in some comfort not only both of
the children conceived that night but also his two stepchildren. By
now he was convinced that he was infertile. However, his increasing
wealth and status and his continuing physical attractiveness made him
even more of a magnet to other women. He was often unfaithful. His
partner knew about his infidelities — but she agreed to tolerate his
behaviour in exchange for a guarantee that, no matter what happened,
she and her three children would be financially secure. In the years to
come, he unknowingly sired two more children via his promiscuity.
150 151SPERM WARS SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
n previous scenes, we have watched men and women going to great
lengths to hide their infidelity. If they failed, they suffered. Yet
here we meet four people who are openly unfaithful. Partner-swapping
is not particularly common in Western society, but it occurs often
enough to form a recognisable part of the rich mosaic of human
sexuality — a part, moreover, that promotes sperm warfare. A survey
in the USA in the 1970s revealed that almost 5 per cent of couples had,
at one time or another, openly swapped partners with another couple,
though nearly 80 per cent of these had done so only once or twice.
What circumstances can lead such behaviour to actually improve a
person's reproductive success?
The answer lies in the way criteria for choosing partners and lovers
can change with time during the course of a person's life. Of course,
when open infidelity was first mooted in Scene 19, the conscious
preoccupation of the four characters will have been with superficial
matters. Excitement and fear will have been relished in equal
proportions — the excitement of imminent infidelity will have been
tempered by fears concerning their bodies and their sexual
performances. Subconsciously, however, their bodies will have been
wrestling with more important matters. Would the reproductive
benefits of their planned actions outweigh the reproductive costs?
The more extrovert couple had an easy decision. After five years of
unprotected sex, they had failed to produce children. Each thought
their partner might be sterile, and here was a golden opportunity to
have sex with someone of proven fertility. Both their conscious and
their unconscious brains might well have reached the same conclusion.
The other couple had a more difficult decision, though consciously
neither would probably have appreciated their body's logic. Their
family was rapidly outgrowing their home and finances. Even two
children might be too many for them to raise successfully without an
improvement in circumstances. So
how could they each have another? The man could manage to have a
third child only if he could find somebody who would raise that child
without his help. His friend's partner offered just such a possibility.
His own partner, on the other hand, could have a successful third child
only with better financial support than he, her present partner, could
provide. Her friend's partner had potential, argued the woman's body.
Not only was he wealthy, he was in a relationship that was looking
increasingly unstable. Maybe, if she had a child which he thought
might be his, he would help her financially. Or she might even be able
to wrest him from her friend, his current partner. On top of all that, her
body could see a benefit in conceiving via this man: not only was he
very attractive to women, he had also achieved a higher status in life.
Genetically, a child by this man could be far more successful than
another child by her current partner.
Of course, some of the potential costs of infidelity were still there
for both couples — risk of disease, for example. But most of the
dangers usually associated with infidelity were minimised by the
nature of the situation. All of the characters knew and agreed to what
was going to happen, so there was no need for deception and hence no
risk of discovery. By agreeing to have sex in view of each other, they
removed all possibility of deceit. Both relationships were already
unstable, and the risk of anybody being deserted by their partner
because of the night's events would have seemed no greater than
before.
All four, therefore, subconsciously computed that they might gain
from a bout of partner-swapping. And as it turned out, all four were
correct. This is easy to see for three of them. The childless woman
conceived. Her partner sired two children in one night. The other
woman struggled initially, but eventually wrested the first man from
his partner, benefited from his wealth, and successfully raised three
children. Without that night of abandonment, she might have raised
only two — and those, with difficulty. Only for the other man is it less
easy to see the value of his decision. Of course, he thought he sired
two more children that night. But he didn't. Moreover, for five years
152 153
ISPERM WARS SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
he had the stress of raising a third child (which wasn't his, though he
thought it was). Eventually, he was deserted by his partner for a man
with whom she had first been unfaithful with his consent. As a result,
he also lost day-to-day contact with the children, for whom he cared
very much.
At first sight, his may not seem much of a success story. However,
as a result of that night's events, the two children who really were his
were raised more easily and given a better launch into life than he
could ever have given them. He still saw them often and gave them
what help he could. From time to time they lived with him for short
periods, and they probably never really felt abandoned by him. If he
hadn't agreed to that night's events, he might have struggled to raise his
two children. And it is worth bearing in mind that, as we saw in Scenes
9, 11 and 16, such a struggle can sometimes have dire consequences.
He might still eventually have been deserted by his partner, but in less
favourable circumstances. In particular, he might well have been less
fortunate in the man who took his place in raising his children. Indeed,
a key factor in the less extrovert man's success was that his friend did
turn out to be a good stepfather. Of course, in part this may have been
because he kept a close eye on the way his children were being treated
in their new situation. Mostly, however, it was because his ex-partner
tolerated her new partner's infidelities. The latter was not by nature
monogamous, but as long as he could be promiscuous he was happy to
help support her children. In effect, she traded his sexual freedom for a
guarantee that, no matter what happened, she and her three children
would be financially protected.
All four gained from their night of sexual abandonment. But if
things had turned out differently, and the previously childless man had
failed to win those two sperm battles, he would have lost out in a big
way. But, in fact, he was most unlikely to lose. He was a sperm wars
specialist, producing too many sperm. His friend was not, producing
too few. Put the specialist in a monogamous situation and he was subfertile. After each insemination, huge numbers of his killers and egggetters
clustered around his partner's egg. Multiple sperm entered the egg
simultaneously and dense concentrations of deadly chemicals were
released by the surrounding sperm hordes. The egg always died. But
send his sperm in to battle, and he was virtually invincible. His huge
armies would decimate those of lesser opponents and, having been
reduced in number themselves, would then send the correct number of
sperm on to seek an egg.
On that night of sexual revelry, the less extrovert man produced
small armies, rich in blockers (Scene 7) and family-planning sperm
(Scene 16). His reproductive strategy in the past had centred on
guarding his partner from other men. Then he could use long-term,
routine sex to produce children at long but measured intervals when
times were good (Scene 16). Twice, he had needed eight months of
unprotected sex to impregnate his partner. Even so, he would probably
have produced more children with his partner had he been more
successful socially and financially. But in sperm warfare he was
doomed to failure.
We discuss the existence of these two male types in Scene 35. We
have already discussed why women sometimes respond to intercourse
by ovulating on cue (Scene 15) and why men respond to the sight of
another couple having intercourse by becoming aroused and erect
(Scene 9). These sexual responses were important factors in
determining the outcome of the scene we have just witnessed. Perhaps
most important of all were the women's decisions to drop the usual
coyness and secrecy that one, if not the other, would usually have
retained, in favour of blatant and open infidelity. The unconscious
motivation was the same for both of them. In their lifetime of
shopping around for genes, they had each reached a stage when it was
worth trying someone new. As things turned out, theirs was a fair
exchange.
154 155SPERM WARS
SCENE 20
Tasteful Display
By chance, their business trip coincided with the first hot day of
summer. The man had engineered the visit and they had been looking
forward to it for days. The weather was a real bonus.
The woman had made a point of telling her partner where she was
going and who she was going with. The last thing she wanted was to
make him suspicious. He was steady and reliable, both as a partner
and as father to their two children, and she didn't want to lose him.
But, at the same time, she felt that she needed some excitement in her
life, and the man with her in the car could be it. He was a challenge,
and he was attractive. She enjoyed teasing and flirting with him — she
even enjoyed arguing with him, which she did often.
In contrast, the man had not bothered to tell his partner. It was not
that unusual for him to go on such a journey or to take somebody with
him. In fact, his partner no longer seemed to care what he did and
appeared to welcome his days away. Secretly, he had decided she was
having an affair. Not that it bothered him much — in fact, he would
almost have welcomed her infidelity, taking it as a licence to pursue
infidelity himself.
As they drove the two hours to their destination, he pondered their
budding relationship. After a year of platonic acquaintance, they knew
a lot about each other. Enough, for example, to know that there was no
way they could live together. Yet, somehow, even this incompatibility
was attractive. Recently, they had begun to touch each other as they
spoke. On a few occasions, like today, they had even greeted each
other with a friendly kiss. He was sure they had an unspoken
understanding. One day they would have a proper affair, snatching and
engineering sex when
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
they could. And, as he drove, he had high hopes that today might mark
the beginning of that affair.
Their business completed by mid-day, they decided to enjoy their
freedom and the weather and to buy food and drink for a picnic. As
they drove into the country, passing field after field and wood after
wood, she began to tease him. He was looking for somewhere
secluded. She pretended not to realise and kept pointing out roadside
verges or open fields near houses — suitable for a picnic, but nothing
else. Eventually, growing hungry, she decided she had teased him
long enough. When he pointed out a small, secluded field, she
accepted. Rows of freshly mown hay lay silver-green in the intense
sunlight. He thought it looked perfect. She said it would do.
There was a large blanket in the car which they took and stretched
out in the corner of the field, part in dappled shade, at her request, and
part in sun, at his. She was wearing a loose cotton dress and, knowing
from the minute she got up in the morning she could engineer a
picnic, had brought a straw hat with her. He had started the day
wearing a suit and tie but within minutes of finishing their business
meeting he had taken off his jacket and unbuttoned his collar. Even
so, sitting there in the field in the heat he looked uncomfortable.
Knowing he was no stranger to nude sunbathing, she began to tease
him again, challenging herself to persuade him to take off his clothes.
The denouement came when she accused him of having something to
hide.
Interpreting her teasing as a sexual overture, he was becoming
aroused. Even so, he felt slightly silly as he removed his shoes and
socks and even sillier when he stood up, took off his shirt, then in one
movement pushed down his trousers and pants. Now naked, he stood
there, penis half erect, wondering what he should do next. Avoiding
any reaction to his nakedness, she simply commented that he would
be much more comfortable now and busied herself with the picnic.
Still standing, he suggested that she, too, should take off her clothes.
She shook her head, saying that she would burn, even in dappled
shade.
156 157SPERM WARS
She took it in her hand, kissed its tip, and spoke to it softly, stroking it
as if it were a cat. After a few moments, she took it into her mouth and
slowly worked backwards and forwards. He tasted clean and waxy.
After twenty seconds or so, she took it out, formed a tunnel with her
hand, and began very slowly to pump. Then she let go, saying she
wanted to watch him finish himself off.
Convinced by now that they weren't going to have intercourse, he
needed little encouragement. If he didn't ejaculate soon, he would go
crazy. As she watched him pump, her gaze switched from his penis to
his face and back again. She watched intently, so as not to miss the
moment. He came quickly, turning sideways so as not to spray her. The
first two spurts shot out so fast she couldn't see where they went. Then
she saw the final three spurts emerge more slowly and drip on to the
grass in front of them. After he had worked out the last drop with his
hand, he too sank back on his haunches.
Almost immediately it was over, he felt depressed and a little
cheated. He had wanted to come inside her, not in mid-air. For her part,
she felt relieved that his urgency was now gone. She also felt a genuine
tenderness for his body and, she had to admit it, some pleasure at the
way she had made him dance when she pulled his strings.
umans are not the only mammals of which the female smells,
licks or sucks the male's penis as part of courtship. Monkeys
and apes do so often. So do rats, dogs and many others. Usually, such
intimate activity follows through to intercourse, but not always.
Sometimes (as in this scene — which involves the same couple as in
Scenes 10 and 26) the male responds by ejaculating in mid-air, rather
than in the female. Is this a mistake — some error in male or female
programming? Or is it possible that when a male ejaculates without
intercourse in the presence of a female they both increase their
reproductive success? Of course, most people would probably argue
that such
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
behaviour is simply the result of the generation of sexual excitement
and its gratification. As we have already discussed (Scene 10),
however, any behaviour that has evolved to be sexually exciting
usually has repercussions in terms of reproductive success. This is as
true for a man ejaculating in a woman's presence as it is for any other
sexually exciting piece of behaviour.
In effect, a man seeks or allows oral sex as a display of health or
fidelity. He ejaculates openly as a display of health and potency. From
time to time, the benefits of such display outweigh any cost. The man
in the scene, for example, gained from ejaculating in front of his
potential lover. Moreover, he gained more than he would have done
from saving those sperm for inseminating his partner later in the day
(Scene 10).
The sperm he ejaculated were shed, not wasted: the consequences
for his next ejaculate were the same as if he had simply masturbated
(Scene 12). Whether a man stimulates himself or whether he is
stimulated by a woman, the number of sperm he sheds is the same.
Only when he has intercourse are the numbers different. Often, of
course, as in this scene, a man does not know until the last minute
whether he is going to have intercourse or ejaculate in mid-air. That
the two ejaculates are different shows how quickly a man can adjust
his ejaculate (Scene 4).
After shedding sperm, the man in Scene 20 had an even younger
and more killer-rich ejaculate waiting in his tubes than he had before.
If the woman did now change her mind and allow him to inseminate
her later anyway, his new sperm army would be as good as, if not
better than, the one he would have introduced earlier. The problem
comes when he returns home to his partner. His waiting ejaculate is
now right for inseminating a mistress (Scene 13), not for routine sex
with a partner (Scene 12) — or at least, not a faithful partner. The
point is, however, that if his partner really is faithful, he can afford to
introduce into her body the occasional sub-optimal ejaculate. If she is
not, he cannot.
Men's bodies seem to work to the following rule: 'If I have
160 161
HSPERM WARS
had the opportunity to be unfaithful, then while I was away so too has
my partner.' In the case of the man in the scene, this possibility was in
fact a reality — his partner had been unfaithful in his absence (Scene
10). So, when he inseminated her later that day, he had the inseminate
he needed. It was the young, aggressive and fertile inseminate
appropriate to immediate sperm warfare, not the defensive, lowfertility sort appropriate to routine sex. Once a man enters a phase of
infidelity, therefore, similar ejaculates become appropriate for both his
partner and his lover. Having sex with two women does not prevent
him from producing an ejaculate suitable for both — no matter how
often he has sex with either.
So the man lost little, if anything, by ejaculating on to the grass —
except, of course, that ejaculating on to grass does not fertilise eggs.
He might have missed the chance of making his companion pregnant.
But even that may not be as lost an opportunity as it might at first
seem. If the woman didn't want him to inseminate her, there was a
good chance that she was not in her fertile phase anyway. Since, as we
saw in Scene 6, women are most likely to have sex with a lover during
their fertile phase, a man has little to lose reproductively by leaving his
mistress to decide when they should have sex.
The man's strategy was to be patient now in the hope of future
rewards. In order for this strategy to pay off, his behaviour in the field
today needed to increase his chances of gaining those future rewards.
He didn't know it, but as the pair of them prepared for their picnic, his
prospects were on a knife's edge.
The woman's body did not want his partnership, only his genes. In
this new man her body saw qualities that would suit her next child, if
she were to have one. She would commit herself to having his child
only if these qualities out-weighed the potential costs of infidelity. The
equation was finely balanced, not least because her potential lover had
so far given no evidence of sexual potency. From her body's point of
view, this afternoon was to be a test of his potential — the final
collection of facts, the final balancing of the
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
equation. Subconsciously, she was not after sperm, but information.
First, there was his body. She had never seen him naked but, when
she did, she found his body as good as she had expected. Like most
men, of course, he assumed her main interest would be in the size of
his penis and muscles. What in fact interested her most in his
nakedness were his buttocks. The best indication of a man's health and
hormones is the ratio between his waist and buttocks. Ideally, a tape
round his waist should measure nearly the same (about 90 per cent or
so) as a tape around his hips and buttocks. Firm, tight buttocks are a
good, though of course not perfect, indication of his health and
fertility.
Next, there was his ability to gain an erection and ejaculate. Not
until he began to kiss her after the incident with the car was her body
finally reassured that he was not impotent.
Finally, there was his sexual health. The best way to check for
infection was to examine his penis closely. She looked closely, then
licked and tasted him. Absence of rashes and sores and a reasonably
pleasant taste are a good sign of health, and her body knew this. The
ejaculate also gives away a great deal. A liquid, whitish ejaculate with
a normal smell is a sign of health, whereas discoloration, particularly
bright yellow or orange, or a bad smell, are often signs of infection.
So, too, are traces of blood.
In those few minutes the woman collected an abundance of
information about the man, much of which would have been hidden
from her if she had simply had sex with him. As it happened, he
passed all of the tests.
It is not only during her first encounter with a potential lover that a
woman might gain from tasting a man's penis. From time to time, she
may also gain from doing so during routine sex. Partners who were
once healthy may become diseased. A woman benefits from being
alerted to this change by seeing, smelling or tasting an unsavoury
penis. She can also use oral sex to taste or smell infidelity (as can a
man — Scene 10). Traces of a lover can remain on a man's penis for
hours. Not only a man's
162 163SPERM WARS
partner but also his mistress can gain from oral sex. The latter will
expect to find traces of her lover's partner on his penis; if she can also
taste her vagina, she can either be reassured that the other woman is
healthy or be alerted that she is not.
There are a number of other ways in which a woman might gain
from making a man display his ejaculate — again, not only on her first
encounter with a potential lover, but also from time to time as part of
routine sex. As well as seeing and smelling his ejaculate, she can be
alerted to possible disease by its taste. She should also scrutinise more
closely a partner who unexpectedly cannot ejaculate or who produces a
small ejaculate. Of course, if it is several days since they last had
routine intercourse, the explanation may simply be that he has
masturbated recently. Even discovering this is useful to her (Scene 13),
but, much more importantly, the explanation may be that he has
recently been unfaithful. The time scale for scrutiny is rather short, but
not so short that a woman cannot sometimes catch her partner out. For
example, many men would have difficulty ejaculating in front of their
partner in the first hour after inseminating a mistress. Moreover, the
volume of their ejaculate will not return to normal for twelve hours
after infidelity.
Despite this scrutiny, a man can still gain from deliberately
ejaculating in front of his partner from time to time. Choosing each
occasion carefully so as to display a good ejaculate can be a powerful
way to advertise his continuing good health. He can also reassure, or
mislead, his partner over whether he has recently been unfaithful. It is
testimony to the success of this male strategy that most women
probably would not notice a smaller ejaculate than usual. This is
precisely because most men do not display their ejaculate very often
— and when they do, they pick their moment. So most women never
get a chance to learn the subtleties of how their partner's ejaculate
normally varies. Consequently, they never get a chance to learn how to
recognise a departure from normality. Any man who does display his
ejaculate too often may find it more difficult to hide ill-health or
infidelity if he ever needs to. In particular, he should avoid
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
placing his penis in his partner's mouth or displaying his ejaculate too
soon after being unfaithful. It follows that a woman's best strategy is
occasionally to pick her own moment to give oral sex, or to stimulate
open ejaculation. The more unexpected she can make those moments,
the more information she is likely to collect.
SCENE 21
An Abandoned Selection?
The girl was wearing only a bikini and a thin see-through wraparound, but she was still hot. She fanned her face with her hand. The
young man next to her in the back seat of the car saw her action.
Nodding and smiling, he mimicked her hand movement in unspoken
agreement. She smiled back, wishing he could speak her language
better.
Under a clear blue sky, the road ahead of them snaked up and round
the side of a hill. The sea was to their left, mountains to their right. She
shouted her intentions to the driver and his male companion in front,
then stood up, poking her head and shoulders through the sun roof.
Despite its heat, the air cooled her as it rushed past. A short distance
ahead, just disappearing around the first corner, was a similar car
containing the other three members of their group. The only other
female, a woman a few years older than herself, was also standing.
The girl tried to attract her attention, but the sound of the wind
drowned her shouts.
Soon, both cars pulled up in a lay-by under overhanging trees. As
the noise of the engines died, it was replaced by the cicadas' loud
singing. The seven people gathered together their bags, parasols,
beach mats and towels, then set off along a tree-lined path, easy and
relaxed in each other's company. Six of them had been travelling
together for weeks, seeing as much of the
164 165SPERM WARS
continent as they could, as cheaply as they could. Since arriving at the
coast a week earlier, their days had been spent on secluded beaches.
Their nights had been spent at beach bars, intoxicated by cheap
alcohol, cheap drugs and good company. It was on such an evening,
two nights ago, that they had met the young stranger who was now
with them.
After a few minutes' walk, they arrived at the top of a high cliff
overlooking sand and sea. Pausing, they took in the view, each
casually putting an arm round the person next to them. The girl had
one arm round the woman's waist, her other round the stranger's. In
sudden exhilaration, she kissed first the woman then the man, then ran
forward urging the others to follow. Once over the brow of the cliff,
they had to make their way down a long, zigzag path, steep and
obscure enough to deter the casual holidaymaker. They were lucky.
They had inside information — the young stranger had been born in
the area. Although he had travelled the world, every summer he came
back to his beloved coast.
The path was very narrow. The girl, in front, did not notice the four
young men walking up the path until she turned the corner and nearly
bumped into them. They exchanged greetings, but she was
concentrating so hard on not falling off the cliff that she failed to
notice the close interest they took in her and the rest of her group.
They were to change her life in a way she could never have guessed —
but even had she known, she might not have cared. Elated by her
surroundings and excited at the afternoon's prospects, she was feeling
particularly frisky.
First to arrive on the beach, the girl took off her sandals and ran
across the sand to the water's edge, soon to be joined by the others.
After allowing the water to lap around their feet for a few moments
the group moved on, following their local friend. They walked
purposefully along the deserted beach towards tall rocks, jutting out
into the sea. As they drew nearer, they could see that the rocks had
'nudista solo' crudely aerosolled in white paint, high up on their
surface.
The six friends and their guide clambered over the first
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
outcrop into a small sandy cove. Ensconced under a parasol, stretched
out in the shade were two naked women. Nearby, their naked children
were playing with a beach ball. A short distance out to sea a small
boat-load of tourists travelled slowly past. At the top of the beach,
almost hidden in the entrance to a small cave, was an old man.
Wearing nothing except a straw hat, he was perched on a folding chair.
One hand held a walking stick, the other rested on his genitals. He was
watching the naked women closely.
The group clambered over more rocks and crossed two more coves,
both deserted, before entering a third, more secluded, one. An
overhanging cliff face shielded the beach from above, and a curve in
the seaward rocks hid it from boat-bound voyeurs. The group threw
down their towels and bags and immediately removed their scanty
clothes. The local man was no stranger to nudity and had welcomed
this chance to take his new friends to the nudist beach. They seemed
to share his relaxed attitude to nakedness and were obviously quite
used to each other's bodies. What he did not know was that at one
time or another since coming on holiday, both women had had sex
with each of the men, as well as with each other.
Almost within seconds of removing their clothes they were all
cooling off in the sea. The younger girl began some horseplay with
two of the men, splashing them, jumping on their backs, and grabbing
at their genitals. They responded by pushing her under the water, then
swimming strongly out to sea. She began to follow, but soon turned
and swam back to the beach.
One by one, they came out of the water. Soon, they were all
stretched out naked in the sun, passing around a bottle of wine and the
first of that afternoon's joints. There was little real conversation, just a
relaxed, drug-induced sense of well-being. The girl was lying with the
other woman, resting her head on the other's stomach. As they talked,
drank and smoked, they occasionally touched and stroked those bits of
each other's bodies that they could reach without effort.
The women stayed like this for nearly an hour, sometimes
166 167SPERM WARS
talking, sometimes drifting in and out of sleep. After a while, the girl
began to feel restless. As she looked around, she could see that some
of the men were also asleep. Sitting up and stretching, she nudged the
other woman and pointed to the young stranger next to them. Fast
asleep, his arms and legs were gently twitching. So too was his very
erect penis. The girl whispered in her friend's ear. They smiled in
anticipation, then went across on hands and knees to the man's side.
There, the girl watched and waited while the woman knelt by his
head and bent forward to kiss him on the lips. He jumped, then
jumped again when the girl kissed his genitals. As the two women
kissed and stroked his body, every part of him relaxed — except one.
And that grew even harder. After a few minutes, the girl sat astride
his groin, massaging his body with her hands and gently massaging
his penis with her vaginal lips.
By this time, the other four men were awake. At first, they feigned
an air of casual disinterest. Watching the women's antics only
intermittently, they resumed their smoking and drinking, passing an
occasional good-humoured comment on the stranger's progress.
Eventually, however, their erections betrayed their true feelings.
The girl, still sitting astride her prey, finally initiated intercourse
with him. No stranger to this position, she slowly but expertly rose
and fell as if impaled on his erect penis. As she did so, her friend bent
further forward to lick his nipples, resting one of her breasts on his
face in the process. Her movement lifted her bottom in the air as if in
display to the man sitting behind her. Throwing down his cigarette, he
proclaimed he could stand it no longer. He moved quickly across to
the woman and, with the minimum of foreplay, entered her from
behind. For a while, the remaining three men watched, then moved
closer to await their turn.
Because of their positions, the two women were facing each other.
If they had bent forward, they could have kissed. But they didn't.
Instead, as intercourse proceeded, they looked into each other's eyes,
sharing each other's mounting sensations. The girl
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
was disappointed when, just as she was building to a climax, the
stranger ejaculated inside her too soon and began to fade.
Having been left high on a plateau of sexual excitement, she
moved off him and in one continuous movement sat astride the man
lying next to her. Hardly had he penetrated her than she climaxed. He
carried on thrusting, but once she stopped cooperating after her
orgasm his movements became awkward. Thrusting as best he could,
he was finding it difficult to build up to ejaculation. He was not
helped by the man next to them who, waiting for his turn, complained
he was taking too long. He was helped even less when the man put
his hands round the girl's waist and tickled her ribs, making her
laugh. Concentrating hard, his thrusting eventually brought him to the
brink of ejaculation. Then, at the very last moment, he felt the girl
being pushed to one side and his penis slipping out of her vagina. Still
laughing, she fell on to her back on the sand and the other man
collapsed on top of her.
The prostrate man was more than a little irritated. After all his hard
work, all he had managed was to ejaculate on to his stomach. His
annoyance grew when, with the girl still laughing, the man who had
spoiled his fun entered her and began a long but gentle intercourse.
He did his best to interfere in return, but the missionary position
adopted by his usurper allowed him to resist being pushed off,
especially once the girl wrapped her legs around him.
While the girl's third lover in ten minutes was slowly building to
his climax, the events around her became a blur, even after she had
stopped laughing. She dimly registered the previous man's attempts to
interfere — and the fact that the other woman was still on all fours
having sex with the same man. The one man who had not yet had
intercourse seemed to be urging him to get off. He was refusing,
saying he hadn't finished. Briefly, voices became raised. When her
most recent lover had eventually inseminated her and removed
himself, the last, frustrated, man left the other couple and moved over
to her. She protested a little as he lay down on top of her and opened
her
168 169SPERM WARS
legs, but he took no notice. Once inside her he was vigorous to the
point of aggressive. Resigned to her situation, the girl at first didn't
mind his thrusting, for she was very wet with the previous men's
semen. But intercourse seemed to last an eternity and, bit by bit, she
felt her vagina becoming drier. It was a relief when he ejaculated and
removed himself.
Orgy temporarily over, the group relaxed and returned to their
drinking and smoking. One after another, they went in and out of the
sea, alternating short spells of swimming with longer spells of
sunbathing, drinking and smoking. At one point, the older woman
invited the local man to have sex with her, which he did. But the
group's orgiastic activity did not really resume for another hour —
when the girl announced she wanted the man who had not yet had sex
with her. This triggered the rest to claim the same favour from the
other woman.
This time round, however, the frenetic atmosphere had gone. Over
the next three hours or so, all five men entered both women and all
eventually inseminated them. But no intercourse was rushed;
thrusting, when it occurred, was long and slow; on occasion, a man
and a woman would stay just coupled together, without thrusting,
while they talked, smoked or drank. Often, the men removed
themselves without ejaculating, only to resume some time later with
whichever female next became free and willing. There was almost
continuous sexual activity, but the urgency had evaporated.
Gradually, the intervals between coupling grew longer as, one by one,
the men ejaculated their last and lost interest in further penetration.
The last to inseminate the girl was the local man. Thirty minutes
previously, one of the others had faded inside her without ejaculating.
She had gone for a swim, then returned to the beach to enjoy the last
of the day's sun. It was still hot. Despite all of the afternoon's activity,
her vagina was still hungry. Without a penis, it felt empty. She
walked over to the prostrate local and sat astride his stomach, facing
away from him so that she could talk to her female friend. Drink and
joints were still being passed around, but less enthusiastically than
before.
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
As she and the woman conversed, the girl's hands idly played with
the young man's penis. When eventually it hardened she impaled
herself. It was a sense of completeness, not excitement, that she felt
when he was inside her. They stayed like that for about ten minutes
— she conversing with the woman, he lying on his back and
smoking. All the time, despite their other activities, their bodies were
making subliminal movements, producing a tiny, gentle, but
continuous thrusting of his penis inside her. This sensation was just
what she wanted. Then, suddenly and unexpectedly, her feelings
changed — she noticed the tingle of a potential orgasm. She
responded first by rocking on his penis more vigorously, then by
reaching down to massage her clitoris. He, in his turn, gradually
increased his thrusting. At first, as sensations mounted, she closed
her eyes. Then, for the second time that afternoon she stared into the
eyes of the woman in front of her. The woman urged her on, then at
just the right moment bent forward and began kissing her thigh. The
girl climaxed, and within seconds so did the man.
An hour later, when the sun disappeared behind the cliff, the group
began the long haul back up. They were all tired, both from their
sexual exertions and from their various drugs. But adrenaline fired
them into activity when they arrived back at the lay-by to find that
their cars had gone. What they didn't know was that they had been
stolen by the lads who had watched them arrive at the beach, hours
earlier.
The loss of their transport in such a backwater was devastating.
The cars had been their travelling homes and had contained all their
luggage, as well as their passports and money. It took an hour to walk
to the nearest village, and then another hour of phone calls by their
local friend to alert the police and arrange a lift back to the next
town.
Without their passports they had immediate trouble with the local
bureaucracy, not least when they tried to obtain money. In the end
they had to borrow some cash from their local friend, just enough to
spend the next two days hitch-hiking to the nearest city where they
could get new passports. They
170 171SPERM WARS
snatched sleep when and where they could. It was while they were
all cramped in the back of a lorry that the woman first noticed how
unusually withdrawn the girl had become. When pressed, she
explained that her contraceptive pills had been in the luggage but
that everybody had been so preoccupied with passports that she
hadn't liked to mention it. The woman had no such problem herself:
as they all knew, she had been having unprotected sex with many
different men for ten years now and was totally convinced of her
infertility. But she immediately worried for her friend. They planned
to do something about it in the city, but the time taken to get their
passports and deal with the bureaucracy, the language problems and
their tiredness made them decide to wait until they were back on the
coast.
As soon as they returned, the girl recruited the help of the local
man, the first and last to inseminate her on the beach four days
earlier. It was a further day before she managed to get hold of a new
packet of pills. By then, the two cars but not the luggage had been
recovered by the police — and the girl was pregnant. The sperm war
between five different armies that had taken place inside her had
produced a winner.
n Scenes 18 to 20 we discussed the problems women face in
selecting a mate. But in the scene we have just witnessed the two
women seem to give up all attempt at mate choice in favour of
wanton promiscuity. What circumstances could favour such
abandoned behaviour from the point of view of a woman's
reproductive success, and what are the repercussions likely to be?
In most societies, relatively few people take part in an orgy in
their lifetime, perhaps no more than 1 per cent according to a recent
British survey of nearly four thousand women. Occasionally,
however, such behaviour is more common. The classic examples, of
course, are historical — for instance, the well documented orgies of
ancient Rome. Anthropologically, there are some societies that have
ritualised orgies, particularly for
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
adolescents, in addition to those that may occur spontaneously.
Taken as a whole, extreme orgiastic behaviour is relatively
uncommon, but in a less extreme form equivalent behaviour is not
so unusual.
At one extreme is an orgy in which a woman, as in Scene 21,
allows several men to inseminate her not only within a short length
of time but also in each other's presence. At the other extreme is
conventional infidelity in which a woman allows two men to
inseminate her over a slightly longer time span and not in each
other's presence. At both extremes, what the woman is doing is
essentially the same. Having selected two or more men (by the
criteria we discussed in Scene 18) as suitable genetic fathers for her
next child, she calls their sperm to battle. This ensures that her child
will inherit not only all the other qualities she has selected, but also
the genes for the production of a competitive ejaculate. As long as
this latter benefit outweighs any associated costs, such as a greater
risk of disease from having sex with two men instead of one, she
will gain from her behaviour.
At first sight it might seem that such a strategy only works if the
woman conceives a son. After all, a daughter will not produce an
ejaculate, competitive or not. And to some extent this is correct —
the sex of the child does make some difference to the woman's gain.
But not much, because both sons and daughters will inherit genes, to
be passed on to their grandsons, great-grandsons and so on, for all
the qualities the woman has selected in the man who wins the war —
including his genes for a competitive ejaculate. The only bonus from
having a son is that the woman will have produced a male
descendant with a competitive ejaculate in the very next generation.
In pursuing this strategy, a woman encounters a major problem
— the men she selects to compete will rarely be given an equal
chance to demonstrate their prowess at sperm warfare, because
when the time interval between inseminations is relatively long, the
outcome of that warfare is determined more by when she ovulates
than by the competitiveness of the two armies. In Scene 6 we saw
that if the woman's partner had
172 173
ISPERM WARS
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
inseminated her just a few hours earlier, he would have won rather
than lost the war. Not because his army would have been any more or
less competitive, but simply because his sudden flood of new sperm
would have reached the egg just in time, rather than just too late.
The closer together in time a woman can procure ejaculates from
different men, the better she tests their ejaculates' competitiveness.
The ultimate would be if two inseminates could be mixed together in
the seminal pool before any sperm were allowed to leave. Then the
ejaculates would have exactly equal opportunities, and victory would
go to the more competitive. But this could only happen if a woman
had two men's penises in her vagina at the same time and both
ejaculated simultaneously. Maybe this does sometimes happen — but
not often enough to be discussed seriously.
Interestingly, this problem of timing can be turned to a woman's
advantage. By adjusting the interval between inseminations by
different men, she can bias the competition to favour either ejaculate
competitiveness or the men's other qualities. Essentially, the closer
together she allows different men to inseminate her, the more weight
she gives to the competitiveness of their ejaculates; the further apart,
the more weight she gives to their other qualities (especially if her
body times ovulation to favour the man whose qualities she prefers).
Always, no matter how much she biases the competition in favour of
one male, another male can still win if his ejaculate is sufficiently
competitive.
Most often, when a woman pursues a sperm warfare strategy there
are hours or even days between inseminations by different men. A
British survey in the late 1980s showed that, in a lifetime (by the time
they have had three thousand inseminations), about 80 per cent of
women have had sex with two different men within five days; 69 per
cent within one day; 13 per cent within an hour; and 1 per cent within
thirty minutes. This suggests that, most often, women have clear
preferences based on the qualities discussed in Scene 18.
Nevertheless, the survey also suggests that on
occasion women do give priority to ejaculate competitiveness.
In Scene 21 the two women allowed, even encouraged, two or
three different men to inseminate them within minutes. They also
allowed five different men to inseminate them within a few hours.
These women had selected five potential fathers for their children.
Now, by having sex with all five in such a short space of time, they
were giving as much priority as they could to the competitiveness of
the men's ejaculates.
At first glance it might seem strange, from the viewpoint of
reproductive success, that the woman in the scene who suspected she
was infertile nevertheless pursued a sperm warfare strategy just as
enthusiastically as the younger girl. We might have expected that she
had little to gain from putting ejaculates in competition. We might
also have expected that, knowing her suspicions, the men would be
less interested in inseminating her than the girl. There was some
indication of the latter, but not much. And what difference there was
could have been due simply to the girl being the younger of the two
(Scene 18). But the fact remains that on the whole everybody behaved
as if the woman was fertile, including the woman herself. Why?
The explanation is that nobody really knew whether the woman
was infertile or not. She may have been, of course -one of the costs of
having many sexual partners is a greater risk of contracting a sexually
transmitted disease, and one of the costs of a sexually transmitted
disease can be infertility (over 50 per cent of infertility cases are a
result of such disease). Even so, despite her suspicions she may still
have been fertile. Natural contraception (Scene 16) can make a
woman appear to be infertile, maybe for years. But then, with the right
man in the right circumstances, she may conceive.
Whether the woman in the scene was infertile or not, her behaviour
will have been unaffected. All her body can do in its pursuit of
reproductive success is assume that it really is just a question of being
inseminated by the right man at the right time, and motivate her
accordingly. Failure to conceive may even make
174
175SPERM WARS
a woman more likely to behave like the woman in the scene. Not
many seemingly infertile women take this promiscuous route to
conception, but some do. The woman's behaviour was just as much a
reflection of her body's pursuit of reproductive success as was that of
the fertile younger girl. So too was their bisexuality (Scene 31).
By taking part in an orgy, the two women were testing the men as
much as possible for differences in prowess at sperm warfare.
Although in large part this prowess will depend on the
competitiveness of their ejaculates, a number of other factors will
inevitably have influenced it — some more than others.
At first sight, for example, some intercourse positions might seem
to be better for sperm retention than others — in which case, males
who manage to engineer the best position will have most sperm
retained and thus most chance of winning the war. As it happens,
coupling position probably makes little difference to the eventual
outcome. The seminal pool is deposited at the top of the vagina no
matter which position is adopted. As we saw earlier, the pool stays
there as the penis is withdrawn, partly because it quickly coagulates
around the cervix and partly because the vagina closes behind the
withdrawing penis, holding the pool in place. Only in the woman-ontop position is there a danger that part of the pool may be lost before
sperm have had time to escape into the cervix. Even then, this is only
a danger if the man withdraws too quickly after insemination.
Not only does coupling position have little influence on the
retention of the seminal pool, it also has little if any influence on the
ability of sperm to leave the pool and proceed to the cervix. This is
because of the cervix's neat design. In the missionary position, for
example, the pool is deposited on the floor of the vagina with the
cervix dipping into it (Scene 3). In the rear entry position, the cervix
is either underneath the seminal pool, like a plughole in a sink, or it
sticks up and hangs back down, like a coiled spring 'walking'
downstairs. In the woman-on-top position, the cervix sticks out
sideways and hangs down into the pool. Moreover, no matter how a
woman
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
changes her position after insemination, gravity will ensure that even
a coagulated pool of semen will slide into a new position. Gravity
will also ensure that her cervix continues to dangle into the pool,
maintaining contact between mucus and semen.
The main differences between coupling positions concern not their
influence on sperm retention but their influence on a couple's
vigilance and vulnerability during intercourse. As one of the men in
Scene 21 discovered, it is much easier to defend some positions than
others. Moreover, the rear-entry position allows at least the man to be
more vigilant (Scene 34).
As far as sperm warfare is concerned, much more important than
the position a man adopts for intercourse is the size of the sperm
army he introduces into the woman. All of the men should have
introduced as many sperm as possible, as it should have been clear
that warfare was imminent. Failure to inject large numbers would
have guaranteed a very poor performance.
However, the men did have a problem of strategy because there
were two women to inseminate. Whereas they should have put a
larger army into their first woman because a chance to inseminate
their second woman could not be guaranteed, they should have
avoided putting all of their sperm into the first because an opportunity
to inseminate the second did seem likely. Precisely how many sperm
they deployed will have depended in part on how long it was since
they last had sex with each woman. Suppose it was forty-eight hours.
In such a circumstance, we should expect the average man to inject
about 450 million sperm into the first woman and about 350 million
into the second. Not all men, however, are average.
If any of them had been a sperm war specialist, such as we met in
Scene 19, he would have had an immediate advantage. His large
testes and huge sperm armies could have won the day. But there
could have been another anatomical feature separating the men —
penis size, as well as testis size, could have made a difference.
Most people see the human penis as functional rather than
176 177SPERM WARS
aesthetic. What most people don't realise is that there is more to its
function than simply delivering sperm to the top of the vagina. The
human penis is a very effective suction piston. Its shape is no
accident, nor is the backward and forward thrusting that accompanies
penetration. The penis has evolved its size and shape to remove any
material that is already present in the woman's vagina. In humans, it is
particularly effective at removing any seminal pool or any as yet
unejected flowback that may still be present. As the penis pushes
forward, with any foreskin now pulled back off the glans on to the
shaft, the smooth, blunt tip of the glans pushes through any semen or
mucus in the vagina. As it then begins to pull back, two things
happen: any material behind the vertical flanges at the back of the
glans gets dragged back down the vagina; and any material ahead of
the penis gets sucked further down the vagina, ready to be pushed
through at the next forward thrust. Rapid backward and forward
thrusting during intercourse thus sucks out any seminal material from
a recent insemination. It may even help to remove some mucus and
blocker sperm out of the cervix. The longer and more rapid the
thrusting, the more the vagina is sucked clean of any previous
insemination. The larger the penis, the more effective the removal.
As each man in Scene 21 tried to claim the prizes in front of him,
success or failure depended in part on how he adjusted his behaviour
according to his position in the queue for each woman's body.
The stranger, the first to inseminate the younger girl, was in pole
position — the man with maximum opportunity to deploy his army
and make life difficult for all who followed him. Even if he had a
chance to inseminate the other woman later, his situation would be
less favourable. More than any of the other men, he had most to gain
from injecting more of his sperm now (say six hundred million), and
saving fewer (say two hundred million) for later. Because he was in
pole position, he also needed to ejaculate quickly. Any delay might
have given another male the chance to physically oust him and
deposit his own sperm inside
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
the girl first. It was because of this urgency that he ejaculated before
the girl climaxed.
Having succeeded in being first to inseminate the girl, what the
stranger should then have done, but didn't, was try to delay the next
man as long as possible. That way, he would have given his army
maximum time to leave the seminal pool and deploy itself. (The man
who was first to inseminate the older woman succeeded in doing just
that, despite triggering aggression.) The girl the stranger had
inseminated, having failed to climax while he was inside her, had
other plans. She moved immediately from the stranger to the next
man.
This man needed to get his penis inside the girl as quickly as
possible after the stranger had finished — the sooner he could do this,
the sooner he could pursue his own best strategy. He would, of
course, have been helped in his urgency by having watched the girl's
previous intercourse. Like most men, he would have found the sight
of a copulating couple sexually arousing (Scene 9). While he was
waiting his turn his penis would have been erect and ready for action.
Once inside her, in fact, he had a choice of strategy. He could have
ejaculated really quickly, reducing as much as possible the stranger's
head start, but the disadvantage of this option was that he would have
shot his sperm straight into the stranger's seminal pool. So instead, he
tried thrusting long and vigorously to remove that seminal pool first
— and paid the price. Because of his delay, he was displaced and
relegated from the possibility of being second to not inseminating her
at all — at least, not in the first round.
Just as it is better to be first to inseminate a woman than second, so
it is better to be second than third. Rather than wait his turn,
therefore, the third man successfully engineered events to inseminate
the girl second, not third. At the risk of aggression from the man he
displaced, he moved in at just the right moment.
The fourth man then had no real alternative. Having been thwarted
in his attempt to be the second to inseminate the other woman, he had
to settle with being the third to inseminate
178 179SPERM WARS SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
the girl. Her vagina already contained a seminal pool from two
different men. His only option was to try to remove as much of that
pool as possible by long, vigorous thrusting. In this he succeeded, for
the girl eventually felt her vagina becoming dry. So when he
ejaculated, his pool had the girl's vagina to itself. But the cost of
removing the pool was that he lost time, and sperm from the first two
men had precious extra seconds to swim into her cervix and prepare
an ambush for the fourth man's army.
It was because the best strategy for all the men was to try to
inseminate each woman as soon as possible that the first round of
sexual activity was frenetic and mildly aggressive. The second round,
though, was quite different. As the afternoon wore on, both pace and
tactics changed. Why?
It is important to realise that winning the first sperm battle inside
the girl did not necessarily guarantee claiming the prize of
fertilisation. It would do so only if she ovulated some time within the
following two days, during which her tract would be monopolised by
those first few armies. If she ovulated not two but four or five days
after the orgy, the situation could be very different. So having done
the best they could to win the first skirmishes, there was some value
to the men in a longer-term back-up strategy.
By four or five days after the orgy, most of the sperm from the
first skirmishes would be dead or dying. As time passed and
ovulation still hadn't happened, the chances of fertilisation being
achieved by a sperm introduced into the girl relatively late in the orgy
improved considerably — especially as these later sperm would also
have been very young. They would be the last to lose their fertility
inside the girl, which meant that if ovulation was delayed they would
have a good chance of claiming the egg. Of course, such late sperm
would have to run the gauntlet of the earlier blockers and killers, but
nevertheless they might just succeed.
The fact that each man divided more or less all of his initial store
of sperm between the two women during his first two inseminations
would not prevent him from pursuing a back-up
strategy. A man adds new, young killers and egg-getters to the back
of his sperm queue at the rate of about twelve million per hour. In the
five hours or so from first insemination to last on that abandoned
afternoon, each man will have mobilised a further sixty million
young sperm. The longer each waited to make his final insemination
of each woman, the more young sperm he would have available.
In the second phase of activity, the men were trying to do two
things. First, they were trying to remove as much of previous seminal
pools as they could. They were going to inseminate few sperm
anyway and so needed as easy an escape route into the cervix as
possible. Secondly, they were trying to be the last to inseminate each
female with as many young sperm as they could manage. Their
problem was that if they inseminated either woman too soon, they
would have fewer sperm and might in any case not be the last
inseminator. If they waited too long, and the woman lost interest,
they might miss their chance altogether. Each man, once coupled to a
woman, stayed in position as long as he could, thrusting as slowly
and for as long as possible, his body trying to judge the best time to
deposit his ejaculate. If he decided it was too soon, he would
withdraw without ejaculating and wait until later. One by one, each
man made his decision and ejaculated his last.
Consciously, of course, none of the men knew anything of what
their bodies were trying to do. As far as they were concerned, they
simply felt different levels of excitement as one by one their
opportunities came to enter and inseminate one or other woman.
When their bodies judged rapid insemination to be best, they
experienced intense excitement and virtually spontaneous ejaculation
as soon as they were inside. When their bodies wanted to remove as
many traces of the previous ejaculates as possible, they experienced
only just enough excitement for erection. They had to work very hard
at thrusting before their bodies finally gave them the tingle of loading
and the climax of ejaculation. During spells when it was best to wait
a while, they temporarily lost interest and their
180 181SPERM WARS
erections dwindled. Finally, when their bodies judged there was
nothing to be gained from introducing further sperm into either
woman, they lost interest totally.
In this complex interplay of reactions and interactions, the man
with the best chance of victory would be the one whose body best
timed his own inseminations, most interfered with other men's
inseminations, and best judged when and when not to couple and to
thrust. It would be this man that the women's bodies were seeking to
father their child. The women's role, in trying to further their own
reproductive success, was to give each man maximum opportunity to
prove himself — and maximum chance to make mistakes. In the first
round of activity, the women benefited most by allowing the men
their urgency and their thrusting. In the second round, they benefited
most by allowing the men to play musical chairs with their vaginas.
In the second round, giving each man maximum opportunity to
couple for long periods and to choose his moment, right or wrong, to
ejaculate for the last time was a shrewd method of selection. By
allowing such lengthy coupling without any other overt sexual
activity, each woman was testing each man's ability to guard her
vagina from other men, maintain an erection, and judge the best
moment to ejaculate — all qualities she would like in sons and
grandsons.
During this long, slow, relaxed second phase, the women's bodies
will have experienced satisfaction simply at the feel of an erect penis
inside them. Not until each body decided it had given the men
maximum opportunity to show their prowess at sperm warfare would
it have lost interest in simply coupling. During the short, frenetic first
phase, though, and once or twice during the second, their bodies will
have looked for a different satisfaction. Instead of the quiet, gentle
feel of a penis in their vaginas, they will have looked for the right
moment to begin a headlong rush into orgasm.
We do not know whether the older woman in the scene climaxed
or not. The girl climaxed twice, once immediately she was entered by
the second man and once right at the end, while
182
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
she was impaled on the stranger. These two climaxes actually meant
that, despite everything, she was still not giving all the men an equal
chance at winning the sperm war inside her. She was still showing
favouritism — and the person she favoured was the stranger. How she
implemented this favouritism won't be clear until Scene 25. For the
moment, the question of interest is why she preferred the stranger.
Xenophilia, a preference for strangers, is a powerful factor in a
woman's choice of mate, particularly as a target for infidelity. In this,
women are typical primates. A female red monkey, for instance, was
observed allowing nearly every new male she met to inseminate her,
while avoiding those she knew. Similarly, female macaques are
known to go out of their way to allow male newcomers to their troop
to have sex with them. They do this even though such newcomers
occupy a very low rank and are often victimised by the resident males.
Of course, a female primate does not allow every male stranger to
inseminate her. The males still have to satisfy her other criteria for
mate choice. The point is that, if two males satisfy her criteria equally,
she is more likely to prefer the stranger. It is generally thought that
what the female is doing here is taking precautions for the future. If
the new male eventually achieves a powerful position in the troop's
hierarchy, he is more likely to behave favourably towards her and her
offspring if there is some chance he is the father.
We cannot tell whether the girl in Scene 21 preferred the stranger
simply because he was a stranger, or because he satisfied her criteria
better than the men she already knew. Whatever the reason, she did
favour his sperm. First, she solicited sex from him both before and
after any of the others. Secondly, she climaxed with him, and only
him, during the second phase of sexual activity. It might seem
contradictory, therefore, that she climaxed not with him, but with the
man following him, during the first frenetic phase. But this is not in
fact a contradiction — as will become clear in Scene 25.
183THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
CHAPTER EIGHT
The Climax
of Influence
SCENE 12
Finger on the Button
The woman said goodnight and closed the door to her young daughter's
bedroom. Going into her own room, she undressed, put on her
dressing-gown and went downstairs to pour herself a coffee. Her
partner was out, the house was quiet, and she had at least two
wonderful, peaceful hours entirely to herself. She switched on the
television, picked up a magazine, and began idly flicking through the
pages. Bliss.
Fifteen minutes passed, the television just a quiet noise in the
background. For all the attention she gave it, the magazine, too, might
as well have been in the background. The occasional image or headline
caught her eye as she mechanically turned the pages, but essentially she
was lost in her own thoughts — like butterflies, dancing around in her
head, chasing each other in and out of her mind.
She wasn't sure which came first, the thought that she could, or the
tingle between her legs that told her she should. But suddenly the idea
was there. It would be nice, but could she be bothered? A few more
minutes went by. She put down the magazine and stared at the fire.
Maybe she would. Even having decided, she waited until she had
drunk the last of her now cool
coffee. On her way upstairs she took the phone off the hook. Quietly,
she walked past her daughter's bedroom to her own, and bolted the
door.
For a moment, she toyed with the idea of doing something different this
time. Maybe she would look at the pictures she had secreted away, but
she couldn't quite remember where they were. Maybe she would put
something in her vagina, but she couldn't think of anything quickly to
hand. Two or three years ago, she had used the handle of her partner's
table tennis bat, but then had spent days imagining splinters and germs.
One day, she would buy herself a vibrator, if she could only think of
somewhere to hide it. In the end she decided not to bother with
anything and simply to follow her usual routine. Lying down on the
bed, she untied the belt of her dressing-gown so that it fell open. Her
left hand went across to her right nipple. Her right hand went first to
her mouth to collect saliva on her fingers, then down between her legs
to her clitoris. She began to masturbate.
At first, she had difficulty focusing on her sensations. Other, random,
non-sexual thoughts kept intruding. She tried several fantasies. Old
favourites like being undressed, licked and caressed by another woman
or being worked on by two men got her started, but didn't take her very
far. Then, after about five minutes of stimulation, a fantasy scene with
a friend and her partner finally started her sensations buzzing.
Lubricant was spreading over her genitals and her fingers. Her
breathing grew heavier and her heart began to race. The images had
now gone and her focus was entirely on the sensation between her
legs, under her moving fingers. As she massaged her clitoris more and
more vigorously, first this way, then that, first with this rhythm, then
with that, she felt the flush spreading over her chest, throat and face.
Her body tensed, poised on the brink. Just one more touch of her
moist, swollen clitoris, and she was there. In silent climax, her thighs
and genitals spasmed, quickly at first, then at increasingly long
intervals. Finally, she relaxed. It was done. Not bad, she thought.
Maybe 7 out of 10. After lying on the bed in post-climactic torpor for a
few
184 185SPERM WARS
minutes, she stood up and re-belted her dressing-gown. Downstairs,
she put the phone back on the hook, poured herself a glass of milk and
returned to the warmth of the sitting-room and the drone of the
television. Warming herself in front of the fire, she tried to remember
the last time she had masturbated. It didn't happen that often, perhaps
only three or four times a month. Maybe the last time was about ten
days ago. When she did masturbate, the orgasm was usually fairly
good. Certainly better than any her partner gave her. Occasionally, he
could give her a 5 out of 10 with his hands, but with his penis it was
usually about 2 out of 10. Actually, it was usually 0 out of 10 because
she rarely climaxed during intercourse.
Masturbation had first added sexual colour to her life in her late
teens. At first, her orgasms were pathetic, the merest tingles. She
scarcely knew when she had climaxed — 1 out of 10 at the most. By
the time she was twenty, however, she was often hitting 7.
Her partner didn't know she masturbated. In fact, the only person
who did know was the woman who, with her partner, had just starred
in her fantasy. They had been friends for years, having met long
before they had each met their respective partners. In one drunken
conversation when they were twenty they had talked about
masturbation. She had felt quite daring when she admitted that yes,
she did 'sometimes', but was then totally deflated when her friend
announced that recently she had been masturbating virtually every
night. If she didn't, she claimed, it was difficult to sleep. This had
seemed particularly surprising because at the time her friend had been
suffering from a prolonged bout of cystitis. The disease had invaded
her left kidney and was proving difficult to shift.
For a week after that conversation, she had attempted to emulate
her friend and masturbated every night. However, two nights in a row
seemed to be her limit. Even then, the second night was hard work.
Quickly, she had reverted to the once a week or so that came
naturally.
186
THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
When her partner returned from his night out, she was curled up on
the settee, watching television. They exchanged pleasantries and after
a while began to prepare for bed. As they lay down, she felt like
intercourse. The thought of a penis inside her was mildly appealing.
She tried a half-hearted flirtation but her partner responded with that
edge of irritability which by now she knew meant 'no chance'. Mentally
shrugging, she turned away from him and within minutes was asleep.
f all aspects of human sexuality, the female orgasm has
probably been the most enigmatic. Women differ considerably
in their experiences (Scene 36). Some never have an orgasm. Others
have orgasms but never during intercourse. Yet others have an orgasm
nearly every time they have intercourse. Although clearly a sexual
phenomenon, the female orgasm (unlike male ejaculation) is not
necessary for conception. Women who never orgasm readily
conceive.
Variability is one of the major problems in discussing the female
orgasm. Every orgasm is a bit like every other orgasm, a bit like most
other orgasms, and a bit like no other orgasm. Moreover, no two
women have precisely the same range, frequency and pattern of
orgasm. Women differ far more than men over when, how and how
often they climax.
The five scenes in this chapter explore the ways in which orgasm
and — equally importantly — the avoidance of orgasm can enhance a
woman's reproductive success. Each scene illustrates a situation which
will be very familiar to some women, and totally beyond the
experience of others. In each situation, the function of orgasm will be
the same for all women who orgasm in that particular situation. But
when and how often they make use of that function will differ from
woman to woman — for very good reason. These differences between
women are extremely interesting and in Scene 36 we shall discuss
them in their own right. In these five scenes, though, we are
concerned primarily with the way that orgasm has a different
influence
187
OSPERM WARS
on a woman's reproductive success depending on the situation in
which it occurs.
In some ways, it is difficult to see any function in a piece of
behaviour that is so variable and unpredictable — which is why many
people have concluded that there is no function to orgasm other than
that of giving pleasure. But as we have already seen, pleasure is not in
itself a function (Scene 10), but a by-product of function. Basically,
whenever the body is intent upon a particular course of action, it
generates an urge to perform that action. As that urge is gratified, the
sensation generated is pleasure. The female orgasm is pleasurable
because it has a function. A woman feels like an orgasm whenever
her body judges it will enhance her reproductive success. When her
body judges it will reduce her reproductive success, she feels no such
urge. We begin, perhaps surprisingly, not with orgasms associated
with intercourse (Scenes 24 to 26) but with orgasms generated by
masturbation.
Nearly 80 per cent of women masturbate to orgasm at some stage
in their lives and for most, like the woman in the scene, it is a routine
but not very frequent activity. The average rate of masturbation is
just under once per week — slightly higher in the week or so before
ovulation, slightly lower at other times. A woman is also more likely
to masturbate, and to masturbate more often, as she gets older, at
least up to the age of forty.
The commonest method of female masturbation is to stimulate the
clitoris, usually with just the fingers. Sometimes fingers are pushed
into the vagina but this is most often a complement to clitoral
stimulation, not a replacement. On occasion, a penis substitute may
be inserted in the vagina-again, as a complement to clitoral massage.
In different cultures, objects as diverse as reindeer muscle, fruit,
vegetables and commercial vibrators may be used as masturbation
aids. Women have even been known to recruit a cat or dog to lick
their genitals during masturbation. Even more rarely, a woman may
allow a dog or some other animal to have intercourse, again as a form
of masturbation.
Because of the confusion that has surrounded the function of
THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
the female orgasm, similar confusion has surrounded the role of the
clitoris. This organ develops in the female foetus from the same cells
as does the penis in the male foetus. All female mammals have a
clitoris, the tip (or 'bulb') of which contains many nerve endings and
is very sensitive — more sensitive, in fact, than the tip of the penis.
In some monkeys, mainly those from South America, the clitoris is
as large if not larger than the penis. Often, it is also grooved and
carries urine away from the female's body during urination, much as
the penis does in males. Such large clitorises could play an active role
in intercourse. They are not stimulated directly as a male thrusts,
because the rear-entry position usual for primates means that the
clitoris is forward of the point where the penis enters the vagina.
Nevertheless, because of its size, the clitoris is relatively easy for both
the male and the female to find and handle during intercourse. This is
very different from the situation in most other monkeys, as well as in
apes and humans, in which the clitoris is much smaller than the penis
and is often concealed in folds of skin.
Inevitably, a small clitoris is even less likely to be stimulated
during rear-entry intercourse. Even species which sometimes couple
frontally (some monkeys, orang-utans, chimpanzees, gorillas and of
course humans) do not necessarily stimulate the clitoris during
intercourse. In fact, in such species the clitoris is so cunningly
positioned that it actually seems designed not to be automatically
stimulated by intercourse. Moreover, small, semi- or totally concealed
clitorises are difficult for a male to find. The overriding impression,
therefore, is that a small, concealed clitoris like that of a woman is
primarily a push-button for self-masturbation — not an organ for
automatic involvement in intercourse (Scene 25).
Women are not the only female mammals to masturbate. Many
other primates have been seen stimulating their clitorises, either with
their hands or by rubbing their vulvas on the ground or on branches.
Chimpanzees have been seen inserting leafy twigs in their vaginas,
then brushing them against vertical
188 189SPERM WARS
objects, causing vibration. Nor is female masturbation only found in
primates. Female porcupines have been seen to stand astride a stick
then run, causing the stick to vibrate and so stimulate the clitoris.
Anecdotes apart, we know relatively little about female
masturbation and orgasm in species other than humans, though we do
know that a female chimp will climax if someone massages her
clitoris. Moreover, once the chimp has discovered this substitute for
masturbation, she will periodically solicit clitoral massage by
presenting her rear-end to the person's hand. A cow also will climax
if someone massages her clitoris. A few minutes after massage
begins, the cow's cervix is seen to gape open and move.
The same cervical movements are seen following clitoral
stimulation in humans. Film taken by a tiny camera placed inside the
vagina of a masturbating woman shows that when she climaxes, her
cervix also gapes, dipping into the vagina at the same time. This
gaping and dipping is sometimes called 'tenting' and may happen
several times during the course of a single climax. Orgasmic tenting
of the cervix, combined with climactic events inside the cervix itself,
are the key to the function of masturbation, for they have three main
consequences.
First, masturbation (via orgasmic tenting and so on) temporarily
increases the flow of mucus from the cervix into the vagina. Mucus
flows slowly from the cervix all the time, but orgasm speeds it up —
almost equivalent to the difference between a 'runny' nose and
sneezing. When a woman becomes sexually aroused during
masturbation, glands at the top of her cervix increase their rate of
mucus production, particularly if she climaxes. This quickly increases
the size of the mucus 'glacier' flowing through her cervix (Scene 3).
At first, this is accommodated by the tenting cervix. Then, when
tenting ceases, a part of the older section of the enlarged glacier is
squeezed into the vagina, like toothpaste out of a tube. This flood of
mucus lines her vaginal walls, laying down a thick film of lubricant
ready for her next intercourse (Scene 3). This
THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
shedding of mucus, however, does more than simply enhance vaginal
lubrication. Because it is the oldest section of mucus that is ejected, it
carries with it much of the cervical debris, including old blocker
sperm and disease organisms. This is an effective way of fighting
infection. In Scene 22 the woman's friend was driven to masturbate
nightly during an episode of urinogenital infection.
Secondly, masturbation increases the acidity of the cervical mucus.
When a woman's cervix tents, the mucus inside stretches sideways.
New channels form through the mucus and at the same time material
from the top of the vagina is effectively 'sucked' into the tip of the
'elephant's trunk' of the cervix (Scene 3). The fluids at the top of the
vagina are very acidic, and as the cervix tents several times during the
course of the climax, acid spreads through the mucus channels
making the older portion of the cervical glacier more acidic than it
was before. When the climax ends, part of this acidic mucus (plus any
disease organisms it contains) will be ejected back into the vagina as
described above, but some will remain in the cervix. Neither sperm
nor bacteria function properly in acidic mucus. For a while after
masturbation, therefore, and maybe even for days, sperm are less able
to swim through the mucus channels and disease organisms are less
able to invade and multiply.
Thirdly, masturbation changes the strength of a woman's cervical
filter — most often strengthening it. This is due not only to the
increase in acidity we have just discussed but also to orgasm
triggering about half of the cervical crypts (Scene 4) to void their load
of sperm from the last insemination. This strengthens the filter
because these sperm, on re-entering the mucus, block new mucus
channels. Moreover, because many of these new blockers are high up
in the cervix, their influence may last for days — persisting until the
cervical glacier carries them down into the vagina. Sometimes,
masturbation does not increase the strength of the filter. The critical
factor seems to be how many of her cervical crypts still contain
sperm.
The more crypts that contain sperm when a woman climaxes,
190 191SPERM WARS THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
the more are injected into the mucus channels and the stronger her
resulting filter. Consequently, masturbation twenty-four hours after
intercourse, when many crypts contain sperm, strengthens the filter
more than masturbation forty-eight hours after intercourse, when
fewer crypts contain sperm, and so on. As long as enough crypts still
contain sperm, a second masturbation a day or so after the first
strengthens the filter still further, but a third or fourth usually has no
additional effect. Presumably, after the second masturbation, few if
any crypts contain sperm. Similarly, if the crypts are empty of sperm
for other reasons (because, for example, it is more than eight days
since last intercourse or the couple used a cap or condom at the
previous intercourse), masturbation again does not strengthen the
cervical filter.
We have already noted the tendency for a woman to feel like
masturbating more often during the fertile phase of her cycle than at
other times. This now makes sense — this is precisely the time when
she has most to gain from preparing her vaginal lubricant and cervical
filter for intercourse. All the same, she may still feel the urge to
masturbate at other times. Of course, even during infertile phases she
still needs to combat disease, prepare her vagina for intercourse and
adjust her cervical filter. She also still needs to confuse her partner
(Scenes 23 and 26).
Masturbation is not the only way a woman can combat disease and
prepare for her next insemination via orgasm. There is another way,
not as common as masturbation, but experienced by a number of
women. This source of orgasms is the subject of Scene 23.
SCENE 23
Dark Secret
The purple haze hanging in the air seemed quite natural, as the
woman walked around the supermarket. She was alone. Ahead of her,
stretching for miles into the distance, the meat aisle was completely
empty of people. She went slowly past the beef, then even more slowly
past the chicken, idly wondering what to cook that evening. Just
beyond the bacon she stopped by a big display of grinning pigs' heads.
This section was refrigerated and should be ice cold. So why was she
so hot?
For a while she stood with her legs apart, trying to let cool air
reach her hot, tingling groin. No sooner had she thought of taking off
her knickers than it was done, and they were hanging over the front of
her trolley. An attractive woman in shop assistant's uniform suddenly
appeared in front of her. Picking the underwear off the trolley, the
assistant held them in the air.
'Why did you take these out of their pack?' she asked.
'I didn't, they're mine. I was hot, so I took them off.'
The assistant looked at the knickers, then pressed them to her face.
'Mmm, I like the smell,' she said, her beautiful eyes peering at the
woman over the flimsy garment which she still held over her nose
and mouth.
'If they're yours, you won't be wearing anything under that skirt,
will you?' she said. She breathed deeply through the woman's
knickers a few more times, then continued, 'And you will smell just
like this.' She dropped the knickers. Let me see if they're yours. Lift
your dress and let me smell you.'
The woman refused and backed away. As if from nowhere, a
crowd gathered. Standing in a semicircle with the assistant at
192 193SPERM WARS
the front, they began to hem her in. She tried to back away still
further, but found herself against a wall. A man in the crowd came
forward, pushed himself behind her and pinned her arms so that she
couldn't move. Her heart was beginning to race and she was having
difficulty breathing. She tried to speak, but the man put his hand on
her throat.
The assistant began to undress, handing first her uniform then, one
by one, her other garments to someone in the crowd. Her still
beautiful but now demonic gaze never strayed from the woman's eyes
as she gradually revealed more and more of her body. The woman
startled and the crowd gasped as she took off the last of her clothes.
Her top half was that of a beautiful woman, with perfect breasts. But
her bottom half was that of a man — a very excited man.
The naked hermaphrodite stepped towards her. As it did so, the
crowd began to chant, 'Rape her!' The woman tried to struggle but
the man still held her tightly. In one movement, the hermaphrodite
tore off the woman's dress and pressed itself against her — breasts
against breasts, penis against groin. The beautiful female face began
to kiss her passionately as the crowd's chants grew louder. The
woman tried to struggle, rocking from side to side. Every so often a
tiny noise escaped her throat as she tried to scream. She was going to
be raped.
After kissing her hard on the lips, the face moved down and began
to bite her nipples. More sounds escaped as the woman struggled still
harder. Her heart felt as though it was going to jump out of her body.
The face left her nipples and began to lick its way over her belly
towards her groin. Then, just as it was about to give her oral sex, she
climaxed. In the middle of her contractions, she woke up.
As she surfaced from her sleep, the woman briefly registered what
had happened. It was a month since she had last climaxed at night. In
fact, it was probably a month since she had last climaxed on her own
at all. This had been a good one — 9 out of 10, she thought. She
looked sideways at her snoring partner,
THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
then turned over. As her body made its descent back to normal, she
drifted back into sleep.
e have already discussed the ways in which 'wet dreams' are
important in a man's battle for reproductive success (Scene
14). Here, we consider whether nocturnal orgasms are equally
important for women.
Although all women have sex dreams, not all women have
nocturnal orgasms. By the age of twenty, only about 10 per cent have
ever experienced a 'nocturnal'. Some may have their first as late as the
age of forty. The majority of women, however, never experience (or
at least remember) such an orgasm. Over a lifetime, only about 40 per
cent will ever share the experience of the woman in the scene, but for
those who do, nocturnal orgasms will be an important part of their
sexuality. In fact, for the women who have them, nocturnals usually
produce the strongest climaxes of all. Sometimes, though, the
momentary waking up just at climax can prevent them from being as
satisfying as a masturbatory orgasm can be.
Nocturnal orgasms are nearly always associated with dreams,
although these dreams are not always sexual. Even when they are, the
sexual element sometimes makes only a last-minute entrance into the
dream. Often it seems that the impending orgasm triggers the sex
dream, rather than the other way round. In the dream just recounted,
the woman was sexually aroused even before she met the shop
assistant. The climax was already on its way and the dream was
manufactured by her brain simply to accompany her body's build-up.
It is unusual to dream of hermaphrodites. Most often, people dream of
situations that reflect their own usual sexual activity, though lesbian
scenes for women who have never had a lesbian relationship are
relatively common — more common than homosexual scenes for
heterosexual men.
Women are not the only female mammals that climax spontaneously in their sleep, though information for other species
194 195
WSPERM WARS THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
is scarce. The clearest observations are of female dogs. When
bitches on heat are asleep, they occasionally become very agitated,
presumably dreaming. On some of these occasions, mucus wets their
vaginas and they have rhythmic contractions of their genitals, just
like women.
The functions of nocturnal orgasms seem to be identical to those
of masturbatory ones. Both types help a woman's body in its battle
against infection. Both prepare her vagina for its next intercourse by
depositing lubricant. And both strengthen her cervical filter, as long
as there are sperm in her cervical crypts. In fact, no physiological
differences can be detected between the two types of orgasm. Not
surprisingly, therefore, nocturnals show a link with the menstrual
cycle similar to that shown by masturbatory orgasms.
In the same way that female dogs are more likely to have
nocturnals when on heat, women are more likely to have nocturnals
during, or at least at the beginning of, their fertile phase. The most
likely time is about a week before ovulation — precisely when all of
the benefits of nocturnal and masturbatory orgasms are greatest. This
peak more or less coincides with the timing of the peak urge to
masturbate, but is more clear-cut for nocturnals. Women who use the
contraceptive pill show no such peak in the menstrual cycle for
either type of orgasm. This indicates that nocturnals and the urge to
masturbate are largely under hormonal control.
A consequence of this link between ovulation and the timing of
nocturnals and masturbation is that these two types of orgasm have a
seasonal peak. As we have already seen, because women are more
likely to ovulate in some months of the year than others, humans are
more likely to be born in some months than others (Scene 15). As
nocturnals and masturbation are more likely to occur in the week or
so before a woman ovulates, they also are both more likely to occur
in some months than others. For example, in Britain there are peaks
of birth in February/March and September, peaks of ovulation in
May/June and December, and peaks of nocturnals and masturbation
in
196
April/May and again in November. And as in the menstrual cycle,
the peaks are more pronounced for nocturnals than for masturbation.
Although there are no major physiological differences in the
function of nocturnal and masturbatory orgasms, there are some
minor strategic differences. Most of these derive from the relative
ease with which a woman can keep the two types of orgasm a secret
from her partner.
In Scene 14 we concluded that the number of wet dreams
decreases as a male ages and obtains a partner, because wet dreams
are more difficult to hide from a partner than masturbation. The
opposite is probably true for women — nocturnals are less difficult to
hide from a partner than masturbation. In Scene 23, the woman's
partner was asleep when she climaxed. But even if he had been
awake, he still could not have been certain that she was having an
orgasm rather than simply dreaming. In contrast, he could scarcely
have misinterpreted her intentions had he caught her with her hand
between her legs and a banana in her vagina!
It is probably because nocturnals are more cryptic than masturbation that they are also more closely linked to the menstrual
cycle. Given that both types of orgasm are advantageous if they occur
at the beginning of the fertile phase, nocturnals are probably the
better option — being less likely to betray the woman's fertile phase
to her partner. It is probably also because nocturnals are cryptic that
women, unlike men, are more likely to have them as they age and
obtain a partner, not less.
Many women have both types of orgasm, but differ in whether
they have more masturbatory orgasms than nocturnals or vice versa.
Although the triggers and urges for both types are to a large extent
under hormonal control, they are also influenced by external
situations — one of which is potential infidelity (Scenes 6 and 17), as
we shall soon discuss (Scene 26). Together, the two types of orgasm
help a woman's body to give an advantage to the man it would most
like to win sperm warfare. Her body's
197SPERM WARS THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
potential to influence that warfare, however, does not end with
masturbation and nocturnals.
When she is next inseminated, a woman still has a variety of
options. Everything now depends on whether she has an orgasm during
intercourse (Scenes 24 and 25).
SCENE 14
Another Successful Failure
'Did you come?' the man asked, panting, as, propped on his arms, he
held himself above her body.
'Nearly,' she replied, kindly. 'I thought I was going to, but then it
just went and I couldn't get it back.'
The man slowly withdrew, then more or less collapsed by her side.
'I thought you did, just before / came,' he panted, his intonation a
mixture of disappointment and irritation.
'No, not really. But I did enjoy it. It was nice to feel so close.'
The couple relaxed in their usual post-coital embrace and sank
back into their own thoughts. He couldn't see what the problem was.
This time, he had really gone for it. He had taken his time over
foreplay and there was no doubt that she had become excited. Maybe
she wasn't as wet as she could have been, but she was flushed. A few
more seconds playing with her clitoris and she would have come, he
knew she would. It had been putting in his penis that had stopped her.
As he had climbed on top and pushed himself in, she had visibly lost
interest — her excitement level had immediately dropped about
twenty notches. Even then, he had done his best to get her back. He
had thrust as long and as considerately as he could — not too hard,
not too slow. He had delayed as long as he could. Really, though, he
had known they weren't getting anywhere. He could sense
that she was becoming bored and impatient rather than excited. In
the end, he had given up and just concentrated on making himself
ejaculate. It was wishful thinking rather than a lack of awareness that
had made him suggest she had come just before he ejaculated. Or
had he been giving her an opportunity to lie?
As far as he could see, it had to be his partner who had the
problem. A year or so ago he had had a brief affair with a younger
girl. She had come nearly every time. As long as he had given her a
bit of foreplay and as long as he didn't ejaculate too quickly, she
would come. It was as easy as that. His partner, however, rarely
came while he was inside her. Once or twice a month, perhaps — if
he was lucky. But, try as he might, he had totally failed to find any
magic formula. Last time they had had sex, a week ago, just before
her period, she had come. And he had done exactly what he had done
tonight. He had got her excited during foreplay, almost to the point
of coming, entered her quickly, thrust a few times, and she had
come. Tonight, it had failed. Yet, sometimes, he could virtually miss
out foreplay altogether, and she would come. At other times, if he
tried to bypass foreplay, she would complain.
The woman lay on her side with her back to her partner, feeling
disappointed. She hadn't really expected him to want sex tonight and
now she wished he hadn't. As much as anything, she felt let down by
the way, having made the overtures, he had misjudged what she
wanted. There were times when she really wanted a penis inside her
and wasn't particularly bothered about having an orgasm. And there
were times when she really wanted both. Tonight, what she had
really wanted was an orgasm. Surely he could have sensed that? She
would have been quite happy to have intercourse as well, but what
she really wanted was climax and relief — and she had been so
nearly there. A few more seconds of foreplay and she would have
come. Why couldn't he have waited just that bit longer before
entering her? If he had just
198 199SPERM WARS THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
been considerate enough to concentrate on her until she had come,
she would have been quite happy to have him inside her. But no, all
he had wanted was to feel himself inside her, with no thought for her
at all. She knew the second he stopped stimulating her and began to
move into position that she would lose it. And by the time his penis
had started to go in, she had. That fragile focus on her own
sensations, which she needed if she was to climax, had simply
evaporated. All excitement had gone and his interminable thrusting
had killed it stone-dead.
She envied the women, and she was sure there were many, who
needed only a few thrusts of a penis inside them to send them into
multiple screaming, clawing climaxes. Sometimes she found herself
looking at women in supermarkets, wondering what their climaxes
were like. This morning there had been a short, dark-haired, wildeyed woman in front of her at the check-out. As she had waited
patiently for her own turn to pay she had had this image of the
woman, naked on a bed, hair streaming about her shoulders, having
energetic intercourse and screaming in ecstasy. For her, though, intercourse was almost always a disappointment. If she did climax during
intercourse itself, which happened once a month if she was lucky, it
was always a fairly tame affair; nowhere near as powerful as those
during foreplay or those she gave herself.
The truth was, she wasn't particularly bothered about trying to
come during intercourse. If it happened, it was a mildly pleasant
bonus, but not really worth agonising and making a big effort over.
Especially as most attempts were doomed to failure and mild
recrimination. She would much prefer her partner to give her an
orgasm when she felt like it, then satisfy himself inside her. What she
needed was a partner who was sensitive enough to her needs to be
able to judge what she wanted and when she wanted it. Should she
really have to tell him every time? The man next to her really wasn't
measuring up too well at the moment.
omen differ considerably in their response to intercourse.
Some nearly always climax during intercourse; some never
do. These differences are an important part of the overall picture of
human sexuality, and we shall explore them in Scene 36. Taking
women as a whole, it is more common to fail to climax with a penis in
the vagina than to succeed. On average, only just over 60 per cent of
routine sex episodes (from the beginning of foreplay to ejection of the
flowback) involve the woman having an orgasm. Even when they do,
she usually climaxes during foreplay (35 per cent) or post-play (15
per cent), not during intercourse itself. In fact, only 10-20 per cent of
routine sex episodes involve the average woman climaxing while the
penis is in her vagina.
There are several elements of interest in the scene we have just
witnessed. The man's confusion is one, particularly his confusion over
why an approach that stimulates his partner to orgasm on one
occasion fails miserably on the next. Another is his observation that
during his affair, his lover climaxed during intercourse much more
easily than his partner. Yet another is why the man would have
preferred his partner to climax during intercourse, not during
foreplay. But these elements are the subjects of later scenes; for the
moment, the main issue is the common lack of female climax during
intercourse. Does it reflect some sort of failure? Or is it instead a
successful part of a woman's subconscious strategy — yet another
aspect of sexuality that actually increases her reproductive success?
When foreplay first begins, a woman's body will have carried out
at least some advance preparation. The nature of this preparation has
just been discussed (Scenes 22 and 23) in connection with nocturnal
and masturbatory orgasms. Having these orgasms prepares her
cervical filter in one way; not having them prepares it another way.
Whichever option her body has taken, we know that she will settle
down to intercourse with a certain level of protection against disease,
a certain level of vaginal lubricant,
200 201
WSPERM WARS
a certain strength of cervical filter, and a certain population from
nought to millions of sperm in her oviducts, womb and cervical
crypts. If she has anticipated her situation correctly, these different
levels will mean the state of her cervical filter is as ideal as possible,
and she will get maximum benefit from the intercourse that is about
to begin. Precisely what state of cervical filter is ideal varies
according to her circumstances.
For example, the ideal filter will vary according to the stage of her
menstrual cycle (Scenes 22 and 23). It will also vary according to
whether or not she is contemplating infidelity (Scene 26). The ideal
filter is different yet again if she is about to be inseminated by a man
who is not her regular partner. In particular, it differs according to
whether she wants the inseminator to have an advantage or
disadvantage in any sperm war that might be about to take place
(Scene 26). No matter what the ideal cervical filter may be for any
given woman in any given circumstance, though, the general
principle we are about to discuss remains the same. So in order to
illustrate this principle, let's concentrate on the woman in Scene 24.
This woman had just finished menstruating. Ovulation (if it was
going to occur this cycle — Scene 15) was therefore between seven
and twenty days away, and the intercourse that had just finished
would not make her pregnant. Nevertheless, the sperm from this
intercourse could influence sperm retention at her next intercourse,
which in its turn could make her pregnant (Scene 7). As far as we
know, infidelity during her next fertile phase was unlikely — but, as
always, was not impossible. So even though this current intercourse
was during her infertile phase, it was important to her to retain an
optimum number of sperm — for all she knew these sperm might
suddenly, albeit indirectly, play a role in influencing the paternity of
her next child.
Given her situation, all the woman needed from her intercourse
was a small number of young sperm to store in her cervical crypts
(Scene 4). Having such a reservoir would give her maximum
flexibility over the next few days. When, sometime during those next
few days, her body decided what cervical
THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
filter would be ideal for her next anticipated insemination, she would
have all the raw materials necessary. (Without sperm in her cervical
crypts, her options would be much more limited (Scene 22).)
Moreover, the younger the sperm she could collect now, the longer
her flexibility of choice would last. Of course, at the same time as
collecting the sperm which would give her this flexibility, she needed
as always to minimise the risk of disease.
Before intercourse, her cervical filter was strong because of the
presence of menstrual debris (Scene 3). Most of the sperm from her
last intercourse, a week earlier, had been carried from her body by her
menstrual flow. A few infertile sperm might still have been in her
oviducts and a few of her cervical crypts might still have contained a
number of, albeit fairly geriatric, sperm. Although this set-up
constituted an adequate filter, it would benefit from some 'tidying-up'.
It is at this stage of the menstrual cycle that many women would
either masturbate or have a nocturnal orgasm (Scenes 22 and 23),
thereby helping to rid their cervical mucus of the last of the menstrual
debris, top up their vaginal lubricant, and empty their cervical crypts
of geriatric sperm. Such an orgasm would facilitate lubrication at their
next intercourse. It would also, on balance, slightly strengthen their
cervical filter — in particular, it would give them extra protection
against invasion by any disease organisms carried in the next
inseminate. But it would also minimise their retention of sperm,
particularly old, less motile ones.
The woman in Scene 24 might have been due for a nocturnal,
perhaps even later on in the night in question. If she had had one, it
would have produced the ideal cervical filter for her circumstances.
But an unexpected intercourse intervened before this could happen,
and when her partner initiated foreplay, her cervical filter was not
ideal for the inseminate she was about to receive. She could, of
course, have resisted his sexual overtures and waited until her body
had prepared her cervical filter properly. However, she did have
another option, and this was the one she pursued. Having failed to
prepare for this
202
203SPERM WARS THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
unexpected intercourse by having a nocturnal or masturbatory
orgasm, her body instead tried to engineer an orgasm during foreplay.
A 'foreplay orgasm' performs all of the functions of a nocturnal or
masturbatory orgasm, and for the woman in Scene 24 would have
been a perfectly adequate last-minute substitute. The problem she
faced in pursuing this option was that her strategy required
cooperation from her partner. In part she needed him to provide
stimulation. More importantly, she also needed him to give her time to
climax. But he did not.
We shall discuss why he did not in Scene 25. The simple answer, is
that he would benefit most from his partner climaxing during
intercourse, not during foreplay. On this occasion, male and female
interests were not mutual. This is often the case, which means that a
woman cannot always rely on a man's cooperation when her body opts
to have an orgasm during foreplay. The woman in Scene 24 nearly
managed to engineer the foreplay orgasm her body needed to create
the ideal scenario for insemination, but just failed. Having failed, her
next best response was not to climax at all. And that is what happened.
When a woman has no orgasm during intercourse, then the number
and types of sperm she retains are dictated by the cervical filter in
place before the intercourse began (as is her resistance to invasion by
disease organisms). If her body has anticipated events correctly, this
filter will be just right to retain the best number and types of sperm for
the next few days of her reproductive life. By not having an orgasm
during intercourse, therefore, a woman's body is in effect saying:
'Don't change a thing. The situation in your cervix is as good as it can
be. Just let him inseminate you and your cervical filter will do the
rest.'
In the scene, the situation in the woman's cervix was not ideal when
her partner ejaculated. When her best strategy was thwarted, her body,
by avoiding an orgasm during intercourse, did the next best thing. Her
failure to climax represented a
success. (Precisely why will be made clear in the next scene.) We are
about to watch the couple for just a little longer.
SCENE 15
Correcting Mistakes
They both found it difficult to relax. Their post-coital sleep was fitful,
and after thirty minutes or so both were wide awake again. Suddenly,
for no obvious reason, the man's penis began to stir and within
minutes it was hard against his partner's back. There was no
mistaking this feeling in his loins. He wanted sex again.
The woman had felt his penis rise and then harden, and wondered
whether he would make any overtures. She found herself hoping he
would, assuming her interest was because she had failed to climax
during their recent foreplay. To her surprise, however, she realised
that what she really felt like was having his penis inside her again. So
clear were her feelings that when her partner hesitantly put his hand
between her buttocks to stroke her genitals, she forestalled him by
turning over to face him. After they had kissed a few times, she gently
took hold of his penis and guided it into position so that he would be
in no doubt as to what she wanted him to do.
As he slipped in, she was so wet from their previous intercourse he
felt almost as if he wasn't touching the sides. When he first began his
slow thrusting, it got worse. There was hardly any sensation on his
penis except wetness. He was a long way from ejaculation.
She on the other hand, almost as soon as he entered her, felt the
first sensation that told her she might come. As he worked backwards
and forwards, backwards and forwards, she began to focus on her
genitals, and it was working. Then came the fantasy. It was the darkhaired, wild-eyed woman from the supermarket queue. She was lying
naked on top of her,
204 205SPERM WARS
black hair flying everywhere as she contorted her body, now to rub
their genitals together, now to kiss her all over. With the
combination of the sensations from her partner and her fantasy, the
woman's body wound itself up towards a climax. The noises in her
throat were becoming more urgent, more rhythmic. Just a little more
focus, just a little longer . . .
By now, the man realised his partner was heading towards an
orgasm. Her sounds were becoming more intense. He responded
with his own sounds. The overwhelming wetness of her vagina had
now gone, and he was beginning to get the sensations on his penis
that he needed. But he still wasn't certain he was going to ejaculate.
He worked on a fantasy. It wasn't his partner underneath him but the
flirtatious seventeen-year-old from work. She was staring into his
eyes and massaging her breasts with her hands. Between the guttural
and rhythmic sounds from her throat she was telling him how
wonderful he felt and how he mustn't stop. That did it, and only just
in time — his partner was climaxing. As she did so, he briefly lost his
focus, but still managed to ejaculate in the next half-minute.
For her, the climax was satisfying and just what she wanted. For
him, their combined climax had given a sense of achievement and
satisfaction. She didn't often come with him inside her and he wanted
to make the most of the occasion. But he didn't. Almost within
seconds of their expressing surprise and pleasure at the episode, they
were both asleep.
t first glance, the couple in this scene have behaved very
strangely. Why did they both feel like intercourse again so
soon? Why did the woman now feel like intercourse and not
foreplay? Why did she feel like an orgasm during intercourse now,
when only half an hour earlier she had felt no such inclination?
Could each person's behaviour really have been part of a strategy
that over enough occasions would enhance their reproductive
success? As we know, a woman does not need to climax during
206
THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
intercourse for sperm to enter her cervix. Even without a climax, the
inseminate collects at the top of her vagina to form a pool, her cervix
hangs into the pool, and sperm leave to escape into her cervical
mucus (Scene 3). Nevertheless, a climax does make a difference to
how many sperm enter her cervix. Usually, a climax during
intercourse weakens her cervical filter greatly, allowing many more
sperm to leave the seminal pool, penetrate the cervical mucus, and
hence be retained. Such a climax therefore means fewer sperm are
ejected in the flowback. A multiple orgasm (in which a woman has
two — or even more — climaxes without 'coming down' in between)
has an even greater effect on sperm retention. Essentially, this
influence of the orgasm, whether single or multiple, is achieved in
four ways.
First, when a woman climaxes during intercourse, her cervix
gapes in just the same way as it does during masturbation (Scene 22).
As we saw then, this gaping stretches the cervical mucus sideways,
widening existing mucus channels and creating new ones by splitting
the mucus, and thereby opening up many more pathways for many
more sperm. Any blocked channels in her cervix are effectively
bypassed and rendered ineffectual.
Secondly, as she climaxes during intercourse her cervix dips up
and down as well as gapes — again, just as it does during
masturbation. Now, however, it is dipping up and down in seminal
fluid, thereby mixing the pool. This mixing helps more sperm,
particularly older, less mobile ones, to contact and penetrate the
cervical mucus.
Thirdly, the climactic contraction and rippling of muscles in the
womb and vagina during orgasm generate pressure changes in the
womb and cervix. These changes effectively 'suck' the usual fingers
of semen (Scene 3) much further into the channels of cervical mucus.
This stronger upsuck of semen into channels that are already
increased in number and enlarged by the orgasm does two things. It
helps to neutralise any acidity of the lower part of the mucus glacier,
making it easier for sperm to escape the seminal pool into the cervix;
and it increases the volume
207
ASPERM WARS
of semen in contact with the mucus, again allowing many more
sperm to escape.
Fourthly, a woman's climax during intercourse voids many of
her cervical crypts of old sperm. Although these ejected sperm may
eventually block some of the newly formed channels in the same
way as they do after a masturbatory orgasm, sperm newly arrived
from the seminal pool still find that they have many more crypts all
to themselves. Effectively, therefore, an intercourse orgasm creates
more storage space for sperm to occupy.
This combined gaping, dipping and sucking of a woman's cervix
during an intercourse orgasm permits her to retain far more sperm
than if she had no orgasm during intercourse. As a rough guide, she
retains 50-90 per cent of sperm if she has a climax during
intercourse compared with 0-50 per cent if she does not. Indeed, so
effective is a climax during intercourse at helping sperm out of the
seminal pool that, no matter how strong the filter a woman prepares
in advance, such a climax negates it. In effect, then, when she feels
like climaxing during intercourse, her body is saying to her: 'We
have made a mistake in our preparation for this intercourse.
Circumstances have changed, and our cervical filter is too strong.
We need many more of the sperm that are on their way than we
shall get if we don't do something. Bypass the filter. That way we
shall let in more sperm and eject fewer in the flowback.'
Of course, for an orgasm during intercourse to have the
consequences just described, there needs to be a seminal pool in the
vagina. We should expect, therefore, that an orgasm during
intercourse will be effective at bypassing the filter only if it occurs
after the man has ejaculated. This turns out to be true, but the
situation is not quite as simple as we might expect — because a
woman's subjective climax during orgasm is not actually the critical
event as far as sperm retention is concerned.
Even if she climaxes about a minute (two minutes at the most)
before the man ejaculates, the orgasm will still permit large
numbers of sperm to bypass her cervical filter. How can this be? It
is because the moment she subjectively identifies to
THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
be her climax is only the beginning of a series of events in her
womb and cervix which she cannot feel but which may continue for
several minutes. The peak of the cervical activity that affects sperm
retention actually occurs one to two minutes after her subjective
climax. By the time her cervix reaches this peak, she is already
beginning to relax. As long as the seminal pool is in place before her
cervical activity peaks, her filter will be bypassed. In fact, as long as
it is still in place, a climax even as long as an hour after ejaculation
will allow her filter to be bypassed. There is no need for the man's
penis to be in her vagina, and it makes no difference whether it is he
who stimulates her to orgasm during this post-coital phase or
whether she stimulates herself via masturbation. So even if a woman
avoids climax while the penis is in her vagina, her body still has up
to an hour to change its mind.
We can now discuss why, in Scenes 24 to 25, as the night
progressed the woman's needs changed as far as orgasms were
concerned. The word 'episode' will be used here to mean the whole
time from the beginning of foreplay to the ejection of the flowback.
On the night in question we followed the woman and her partner
through two sexual episodes. At the beginning of the first (Scene
24), her body's main requirement from intercourse at that stage of
her menstrual cycle was to retain small numbers of sperm that were
as young as possible. She also needed to minimise the risk of
infection. To fulfil this requirement she needed to strengthen her
cervical filter before her partner had any chance to inseminate. This
would both improve her resistance to infection and make life
difficult for the older, least motile sperm in his ejaculate. The right
filter for her needs could have been produced a day or so in advance
via a nocturnal or masturbatory orgasm, but her body had failed in
this.
Even so, it was not too late. Her motivation and behaviour during
the first episode were just what they needed to be, because although
she failed to engineer an orgasm during
208 209SPERM WARS THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
foreplay, she did the next best thing and avoided climaxing during
intercourse.
At the beginning of the second sexual episode (Scene 25), the
woman's needs were still the same — small numbers of young
sperm at minimum risk of disease — but the circumstances had
changed. Most importantly, her partner was now offering to give
her a small inseminate rich in very young sperm — younger than
any in his previous inseminate. This was just what she had wanted
all along, and it was this offer that made her body interested in a
second insemination. However, the first insemination had left her
with two problems.
First, her cervical filter was now stronger than before because of
the influx of blockers from the first insemination. If she delegated
sperm retention to her now over-strong cervical filter, she would
lose more of the young sperm in the second inseminate than she
would like. Secondly, she still had the seminal pool from the first
insemination at the top of her vagina. If she had an orgasm during
foreplay now, she would bypass her filter with large numbers of
older sperm from the first inseminate — just what she had gone out
of her way to avoid during the first episode.
Her solution to these two problems was straightforward. What
she needed was to get rid of the first seminal pool, then to use an
intercourse orgasm to bypass her cervical filter. That way she
would retain a large proportion of the very young and desirable
sperm from the second seminal pool. So how could she get rid of
the old pool, given that it probably hadn't yet decoagulated enough
for her to eject it as a flowback? Her best option was to encourage
the man to remove it with his thrusting penis (as described in other
circumstances in Scene 21) before introducing his second ejaculate.
Her body generated the necessary urges. First, she no longer felt
like foreplay, but wanted a penis inside her as soon as possible.
Secondly, she felt like an orgasm during intercourse. Once
intercourse had begun, her body then timed its build-up so that she
didn't climax until the old seminal
pool had been removed and her partner was nearly ready to
ejaculate.
In this discussion we have, inevitably, considered only one
specific sequence of events — the sequence relating to the woman
in Scenes 24 and 25. And although we cannot, obviously, discuss
every combination of circumstances and responses, there are some
general principles worth noting.
First, a woman prepares for her next anticipated intercourse by
having a nocturnal or masturbatory orgasm — or by not having a
nocturnal or masturbatory orgasm — whichever is appropriate, as
explained above. Secondly, if she has anticipated correctly, she
should let the entire sexual episode proceed without orgasm and
leave her filter to do its job. On the other hand, if she has not
anticipated correctly, she should aim to correct her mistake by
having an orgasm at some time during the episode.
In the latter situation she has two options, depending on what type
of mistake she has made. The fact that orgasms during foreplay are
more frequent than orgasms during intercourse suggests that a
woman is more likely to err on the side of having too weak a filter
than too strong. This could be strategic. It is easier to encourage a
man to help her climax during foreplay (strengthening her filter)
than to help her climax during intercourse (weakening her filter).
Once she allows him to insert his penis into her vagina, she loses
much of her control over what he does and when he does it. Even
then, however, she has a fall-back strategy: orgasms after the man
has withdrawn are a substitute for intercourse orgasms, permitting
her to bypass her filter whenever she needs or wants to (again, as
just described).
The best moment for a woman to climax (or not) during a sexual
episode thus varies considerably from occasion to occasion. The
best moment for her to climax as far as the man is concerned,
though, varies much less. As we have already seen (Scenes 12 and
14), he also will have anticipated the intercourse and tailored his
ejaculate accordingly. He will have masturbated or not, as
appropriate, to suit his body's own best
210 211SPERM WARS
interests. Most often he will be best served by a woman climaxing
during intercourse, because only by this means will his carefully
prepared inseminate succeed in having as many of its sperm
retained as possible.
But there is a limit to how much time and effort it is worth him
putting into getting a woman to climax during intercourse. First, if
her body is not interested in an intercourse orgasm, he cannot force
her to climax, no matter how hard he tries. Secondly, the cervical
sperm filter which he can sometimes try so hard to bypass may on
some occasions not actually exist. If the woman has retained very
few sperm from her previous insemination, if she has neither
masturbated nor had a nocturnal since that insemination, and if any
even older sperm or menstrual debris have been cleared, the filter in
her cervix will be as weak as it can be anyway. In this case, the man
gains little if anything from making a great effort to encourage her
to climax during intercourse.
All of this leaves him with a very difficult, if not impossible,
series of decisions to make during sex. First, he has to judge
whether the woman has a filter that is worth bypassing. If not, he
has no need for her to climax during intercourse. If she has a
significant filter, his best option is for her to have an orgasm during
their sexual episode. Even an orgasm during foreplay will do, as
long as he manages to inseminate her within the minute or so
afterwards. If he opts instead to try to get her to climax during
intercourse, he may have trouble succeeding, and if so he will have
to decide how long it is worth carrying on thrusting. He could opt
instead to ejaculate first and then see if he can stimulate her to
climax afterwards, before she ejects the flowback. Or he can just
abandon all attempts to bypass her filter and hope that this is an
occasion when there is no real filter to bypass.
Looked at in this way, a sexual episode is actually a contest
between the man and the woman. Except on those rare occasions
when the same outcome, bypassing the filter, suits them both, each
is forever trying to maneuver the other into
THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
doing something that is against their body's interests. Whether the
man succeeds in what is his safest ploy — to ejaculate a few
seconds after the woman has climaxed — inevitably depends more
on the woman than on himself.
A woman may insist on a foreplay orgasm, then cooperate or
hinder as the man tries to inseminate her within a minute or so
afterwards. If she curtails foreplay, several strategies are possible
during intercourse itself. She may cooperate by waiting until he is
about to ejaculate, then climaxing with him. Or she may not
cooperate. She may climax so quickly that he is unable to ejaculate
within the critical minute that follows. Or she may avoid climaxing
and wait for him to give up and just go ahead and ejaculate — in
which case intercourse becomes a war of attrition, each waiting for
the other to climax. Once the man has ejaculated, the woman can
either avoid climaxing before ejecting the flowback, or she can
cooperate by helping him to give her a post-coital climax. Or,
almost the ultimate cooperation, she can 'finish herself off' by
masturbating to orgasm before ejecting the flowback.
It might, at first, seem strange that, given the competitive nature
of intercourse, men and women appear to make it easier for each
other to judge how near they each are to their climax. Even to the
objective observer, the sounds made by men and women during
intercourse give a clear indication of how their levels of sexual
excitement are changing (which is why the more exaggerated of
such sounds are dubbed on to pornographic films). When climax
comes, it is clear from the sounds, which would seem to indicate a
cooperation between a man and woman that might belie our
interpretation of intercourse as a contest. The sounds, however,
have become part of the contest.
Sometimes, of course, the sounds really do give an accurate
indication of what is happening. On those occasions when a
virtually simultaneous climax is in both people's interests, they are
the method used to achieve this mutual aim. But it is precisely
because the sounds are sometimes honest that on occasion both men
and women can use them to trick the partner. In surveys, over half
of women admit to faking orgasms sometimes, and a
212 213SPERM WARS THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
quarter to doing so often. That they often succeed in fooling the
partner is evident from another survey — which found that the man
invariably reports a higher frequency of simultaneous orgasms than
his partner. There are cases on record in which a man has reported
that his partner always climaxes during intercourse whereas she
herself has stated that she never does. The scene we have just
witnessed was one of those relatively infrequent occasions when
both the man and the woman had the same requirements from their
intercourse, and cooperation was in their mutual interest. In the next
scene, however, the needs of the woman we meet are very different
from those of one of the men who inseminate her. The female
orgasm is about to enter the arena of sperm warfare.
Scene 26
Putting It All Together
The woman lay back in her Friday-night bath and let the last waves
of her orgasm subside. She had finished her period only a week ago
and this was the second time since then. Both times the thought and
the action had come out of the blue. A minute earlier she had been
soaping and rinsing her breasts, with nothing more erotic on her mind
than whether she should clean the bathroom this weekend or suggest
her partner do it while she was away. Maybe it had been the touch of
her soapy hand on her nipple, but the next second the thought was in
her mind, the tingle was between her legs, and she knew she needed
relief. Now, after five minutes of successful cooperation between her
fantasies, her finger and her clitoris, her breathing was easing, her
heart was slowing down, and she was wallowing in the combined
warmth of bath water and post-climactic glow.
To masturbate twice in five days was unusual for her; once a week
or once a fortnight was more like it. She wondered if it
was because she had given up the pill recently, having convinced her
partner that she really wanted another child. However, she did not
question her body too closely — she was enjoying this atypical burst
of sexuality. She mused over the way that two nights ago, only a
couple of hours after she had masturbated, she had then more or less
insisted that her partner give her an orgasm during foreplay as well,
gently resisting his attempts to penetrate until he complied. Three
orgasms in a week. She was doing well.
Over the following weekend, she had routine sex with her partner
only once, on Saturday, and again he obliged her with an orgasm
during foreplay. Early Sunday morning, just before she woke, she
had a nocturnal, her fifth orgasm that week. However, it was the last
exciting thing to happen that day. The remainder was spent
travelling, on the long drive to and from her parents, who had
volunteered to look after her two daughters while she was away. By
the time she and her partner had returned home and she had packed,
it was late. He still wanted to have sex. 'One for the road', as he put
it. But she was tired and managed to put him off. On Monday, she
left for the airport and her long-awaited three-day conference trip
abroad. Her companions were to be her boss and two other
colleagues, one of whom was her new lover.
Actually, 'lover' was an exaggeration, or at least premature. They
had known each other for nearly a year, ever since she had joined the
company. It was her first job since the birth of her younger daughter.
Slowly, they had grown close. Neither had ever found it easy to
make friends with their own sex, but in each other they had found
the nearest they were likely to get to a 'best friend'. In their early
thirties, both had young children and both were now in long-standing
but increasingly stale relationships. He was even convinced that his
partner was having an affair. Within a few months of meeting, they
had freely acknowledged their physical attraction to each other. He
had tried somewhat half-heartedly to do something about it, but
214 215SPERM WARS
each time he suggested a plan, she had found some excuse. It hadn't
been difficult.
They had also acknowledged that they could never live together.
They were both opinionated and competitive, with strong likes and
dislikes. Their relationship worked only as long as they talked about
their separate problems, their separate aims, and their separate
wishes. Whenever they talked about principles, attitudes or just life in
general, they would argue. She could not imagine a home without at
least three cats; he hated cats. She was pale and prone to sunburn; he
was swarthy and worshipped the sun, often spending hours naked in
his secluded garden. She was aggressively vegetarian; he could not
imagine life without meat. She was obsessively tidy; he still had the
air of an adolescent, putting his feet on tables and dropping his
crushed beer cans on the floor. She was provocative and mischievous,
a tease; he was gullible, but strong-willed, ambitious and obstinate.
They each found the other's traits to be irritating but attractive, each
seeing in the other characteristics which moderated their own
polarity.
Their relationship had changed six weeks ago. On that day, in a
field in searing sun, she had given him oral sex and promised that one
day she would have his baby. True, she had done so in part as a ploy
to avoid having sex with him there and then, but she had meant it.
She just hadn't expected the opportunity to arise quite so soon. Then,
as early as two weeks after her promise, they had been asked by their
boss to accompany him on a business trip abroad. Her future lover
had then made her promise that if they had the chance, they would
have sex while they were away.
Even so, she still didn't give in easily. He visited her hotel room
almost as soon as they arrived early on the Monday afternoon, but
she sidestepped his advances, pointing out that this was their only
chance to see the city during the day. Together, they mingled with
summer tourists in the streets and on the canals and enjoyed each
other's company, watching the world parade past as they sat and
sipped at pavement bars. By
THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
late afternoon, they felt extremely close as they arrived back at the
hotel. But still she resisted sex, saying she only just had time to get
ready before they met up with their boss for the evening.
The meal and the socialising were a strain because they had to
maintain a facade of distance. They had both agreed that nobody must
suspect they were so close. It was midnight when they arrived back at
the hotel. She pointed out that the next day would be very busy. She
tried to persuade him that they needed a good night's sleep and that
maybe they should wait until tomorrow night. But this time, he would
not be deterred.
She had seen him naked before, but it was the first time he had seen
or really touched any of the more exciting parts of her body. By the
time they were both naked, because still she teased and delayed, he
was on the verge of ejaculation. With scarcely any foreplay, he tried
to enter her. She objected strongly to his urgency, but he was now so
desperate that he virtually forced himself inside her. He ejaculated
immediately, with scarcely a thrust.
Once he had withdrawn, she chastised him. He apologised and said
that next time he would be more considerate. She said there wouldn't
be a next time if he behaved like that. But she didn't throw him out of
her bed and within fifteen minutes he had stroked, kissed, licked and
massaged her into a climax. Within the hour, his penis was back
inside her for the second time that night, and after a long and sensuous
intercourse they climaxed more or less together.
Half-way through the night, as a sperm war was being fought inside
her body, she told him to go back to his room. When he protested, she
said she was worried about them being discovered together in the
morning. Over the next two days, they maintained a professional
distance, both during the day and while socialising in the evenings.
But on both nights they spent a few hours in bed together before she
made him return to his room. By the time they left to fly home they
had had
216 217SPERM WARS
intercourse six times, and on three of those occasions she had
climaxed while he was inside her. Her body was full of her lover's
sperm, from cervix to oviduct — and she was only forty-eight hours
from ovulation.
She arrived home late that Thursday night, feeling very tired, very
guilty and a little nervous. She bathed, avoided her partner's advances
by pleading tiredness and nausea, and slept. Sometime during the
night, she had a nocturnal.
At work, on Friday, she tried to avoid her lover as much as
possible. He sought her out at every opportunity and tested her
ingenuity to its limit. Eventually, when he tried to snatch a kiss, she
rounded on him. Their trip had been fantastic, she told him, but now
they were back things had to return to normal. She didn't want to hurt
her partner and she didn't want to risk discovery. They had had a
good time and it seemed they had got away with it. She wanted it to
stay that way. If he wanted to remain close to her, he had to forget
sex. A friend she needed, a lover she didn't. She felt guilty at the look
of hurt on his face as she spoke, but her tirade worked. After that, he
made no further sexual advances.
That evening, the last she and her partner were to have on their
own before collecting their daughters, she bathed, masturbated, and
then appeared naked in their lounge urging her partner to give her
another baby. They had intercourse on the floor, just the once, and
she pretended to climax with him. That pleased him because these
days she rarely climaxed with him inside her. They then sat and
relaxed in the warmth of the summer's evening, a cat on each lap. As
she gave him the public version of her business trip, sperm warfare
resumed inside her body and continued all night. But this war was
very one-sided.
As they drove to her parents' the next day, a sperm entered the egg
which had just arrived in one of her oviducts. She had conceived, and
with her help her lover's sperm had won both battles, and the war.
She had kept her promise to him.
THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
his, of course, is the third time we have met this woman and
her lover. We watched them in a hay-field on a sunny
afternoon as she gave him oral sex and promised one day to have his
baby (Scene 20). We also followed them that same evening as they
returned home to their respective partners and had oral sex (Scene
10). Now, we have just watched the woman's body manipulate sperm
warfare in a way that made sure she kept her promise. Her third child
would inherit her lover's looks, drive and ability in combination with
her own cunning and intelligence. Her body had decided that as the
genetic father of her third child, her lover was the best compromise
around (Scene 18).
In Scenes 22 to 25 we have unravelled, step by step, the function
of the female orgasm. We have seen the effects of having a
masturbatory or nocturnal orgasm in the days before intercourse, and
of not having one; of climaxing, and of not climaxing, while a
seminal pool is at the top of the vagina. In this most recent scene we
witnessed a woman's body putting all of these orgasms together and
biasing sperm warfare in her own best interests. As a result, she
conceived a child who was fathered by her lover, not her partner.
This move will have enhanced her reproductive success — as long as
her body was correct in judging that a child by her lover would be
more successful reproductively than a further child by her partner.
Having reached its decision over the best father for its next child,
her body set about engineering paternity. It did so by generating and
orchestrating a sequence of urges to climax and not to climax. Her
body dictated the sequence and timing of these urges according to
who was the next most likely inseminator. We can now discuss the
details of this and other such sequences. Of all of the weapons used
by a woman in her pursuit of reproductive success, her orgasm
sequence may well be the most important, particularly when she
promotes sperm warfare.
218 219
TSPERM WARS
This is the second scene in which a woman has increased her
masturbation rate in the context of infidelity. In Scene 6, the woman
masturbated more often than usual in the week before infidelity with
her ex-boyfriend. At first glance, such events seem simply to reflect
an increase in sexual excitement
— the anticipation of sex with someone other than a partner.
Closer inspection, however, shows that this is too simple an
explanation. The women in the two scenes masturbated or had
nocturnals only at times when, although infidelity was on the
horizon, the person most likely to inseminate them next was
their partner. On no occasion in these two scenes did they have
these orgasms when their very next intercourse was likely to be
with their lover. In this, women differ from men (Scene 13).
Of course, women do have nocturnal and masturbatory orgasms
just before having sex with a lover, but these are often 'mistakes'. In
Scene 26, the woman had a nocturnal on the Saturday night, yet as it
turned out her next insemination was by her lover on Monday night.
At the time she had her nocturnal, though the next most likely
intercourse was the 'one for the road' suggested by her partner on
Sunday night. As it happened, this insemination never materialised.
Her nocturnal was a 'mistake', but one she could later correct, as we
shall see.
So what is this link between infidelity and the frequency of
nocturnal and masturbatory orgasms if it is not simply sexual
excitement? And why, if they are a response to the anticipation of
infidelity, are these orgasms more likely to occur just before sex with
the partner rather than just before sex with the lover?
It is because whenever a woman anticipates sperm warfare, she
more often than not has some preference over who should win.
Usually, that preference is for the lover, not the partner — otherwise,
she would not risk all the potential costs of
infidelity (Scenes 8 to 11). In this scene, just as in Scene
6, we have watched a woman who, in anticipation of sperm
warfare, subconsciously prepared the battlefield to favour her
lover's army.
In the current scene, the woman's body had decided that the
THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
lover would be a better genetic father to her child than her current
partner, but a worse long-term partner. Her body's ploy, therefore,
was to collect sperm for fertilisation from the lover, but not to do
anything else that might cause her to lose her current partner. This
meant she would have to have sex with her partner both before and
after her infidelity. Otherwise, his suspicions would be aroused.
Consequently, she could not avoid sperm warfare. In any case, her
body would not want to miss out on the benefits of promoting such
warfare (Scenes 17 and 21). Her best option, therefore, was to make
life as easy as possible for her lover's army while still giving it a
contest to win. As events turned out, her body engineered the
situation perfectly.
The woman's body initiated its strategy a week before the anticipated
infidelity. Its aim was to allow routine sex with her partner to
continue undisturbed, while ensuring that his army would be as small
as possible when the troops were eventually called to battle. Her
body's technique was first to make her feel like masturbating a day or
so before each anticipated routine intercourse, and this strengthened
her cervical filter. Then, during each routine sexual episode, it made
her feel like an orgasm during foreplay. This orgasm strengthened
her filter still further. In the event, the woman and her partner had
two episodes of routine sex during the critical week before her
infidelity. On neither occasion did she feel like an orgasm during
intercourse itself. So the result of her body's preparations was that on
neither occasion did she retain many of her partner's sperm. Her
nocturnal on the Saturday night was a continuation of her body's
strategy. There was a strong possibility that her partner would want
sex on the Sunday night, just before she left on her trip. The
nocturnal prepared a strong filter, ensuring that even if he had
insisted, she would still have managed to keep down the number of
his sperm in her tract — especially if she also had yet another
foreplay orgasm during the episode. As it was, she managed to avoid
insemination by her partner on the Sunday night altogether.
When the woman was eventually inseminated by her lover
220 221SPERM WARS
on the Monday night, she contained only a small army of her
partner's sperm, just as her body had planned. However, she still had
a reasonably powerful cervical filter, not least because of the
unnecessary nocturnal on the Saturday night. She tried to delay the
first intercourse with her lover for another day to give her partner's
army time to decrease in size still further, but her lover would not be
delayed any longer.
Because of the strength of her filter, when she did have sex with
her lover for the first time, her body felt like an orgasm during
intercourse. That way, she could correct the 'mistake' of her earlier
nocturnal preparation and bypass her filter. Her lover, though, was
pursuing a strategy of his own. Having been thwarted in his attempts
to have sex with her on so many previous occasions, his absolute
priority was to ejaculate inside her. When at last she allowed
penetration, he ejaculated as quickly as he possibly could, before she
changed her mind yet again and made him withdraw.
His urgency prevented her body from bypassing her strong filter
during intercourse, and at first few of his sperm managed to escape
from the seminal pool into the cervix. But, with his cooperation, she
climaxed from his caresses fifteen minutes later. With the seminal
pool still in position, his huge army now bypassed her filter and
flooded her cervix and womb. The lover had got the best of both
worlds — rapid insemination before she changed her mind, and a
high level of sperm retention. And she had satisfied her body's urge
to collect as many sperm from this man as possible. As long as his
army was reasonably competent, he should now easily defeat the
remnants of her partner's small and ageing army.
An hour later, when the woman's lover offered to top her up with
a small army of young sperm — his second inseminate — she
accepted and they cooperated to produce an intercourse orgasm.
This bypassed the filter in her cervix — although that filter was now
substantial, containing blockers from both men — with the result
that a high proportion of the lover's young small army reached her
cervix and womb. The combination of
THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
his first relatively huge army and his second small, young army had
an easy victory while she later slept.
Over the next two days, he kept her topped up with young sperm
— and on half of the occasions she bypassed her filter with an
intercourse orgasm. On her return home, she contained a large and
powerful army from her lover. Her body's aim was now to engineer a
strengthening of her filter before allowing her partner to inseminate
her. She succeeded. First, she avoided sex with him any sooner than
she had to without arousing his suspicions. Secondly, she had a
nocturnal. Thirdly, unable to rely on his cooperation over a foreplay
orgasm after such an absence, she took the safer option the next
evening and masturbated — then immediately solicited sex.
This was to be the insemination that deceived her partner into
thinking he could be the father of any child conceived that month.
She felt no urge to climax during intercourse, only an urge to pretend
that she did. As a result, few of her partner's sperm made it through
her cervix into the battlefield. And those that did would be outcompeted by the numerical superiority of her lover's killers and egggetters. There was never any doubt that this particular war would be
won by the woman's lover.
Her strategy worked very successfully, but of course none of it
was achieved at a conscious level. Her body achieved its aims by
subconsciously orchestrating the sequence of moods, motivations
and responses that would best serve her reproductive interests.
Consciously, she will simply have relished her sexual pleasures, her
excitements and her fears as she cleverly negotiated the slalom of
infidelity and deception.
The behaviour and responses of this woman during her infidelity
were fairly typical. In Britain, the average frequency of nocturnal and
masturbatory orgasms for women during phases of fidelity is just
under one per week (Scenes 22 and 23). During phases of infidelity,
the rate increases to about every other day. These orgasms occur
most often when women anticipate that their next intercourse will be
with their partner. When they anticipate it will be with their lover,
they occur less often.
222 223SPERM WARS THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
Women also change their likelihood of having an intercourse
orgasm during infidelity. On average, they are more likely to climax
during or after intercourse with a lover (33 per cent of occasions)
than they are during or after routine intercourse with their partner (22
per cent of occasions). Thus a lover's army receives assistance in
entering the battlefield more often than does a partner's.
These differences mean that on the whole not only does a partner
encounter a stronger filter than a lover, he is also less likely to
receive help in bypassing that filter. On average, the advantage
enjoyed by a lover in sperm warfare is relatively large. When a
woman is not being unfaithful, she helps her partner to place a large
sperm army inside her on 55 per cent of occasions. When she is being
unfaithful, she helps him on only 38 per cent of occasions, but helps
her lover on 65 per cent of occasions — nearly twice as often.
The really impressive part of a woman's strategy, however, is the
way she manages to engineer a strong bias over sperm retention in
favour of her lover without betraying any hint of infidelity to her
partner. First, she keeps the frequency with which she climaxes
during or after intercourse with her partner the same (22 per cent of
intercourses), whether she is being unfaithful or not. Secondly, her
main weapon against her partner is to increase her frequency of
masturbation and nocturnals, but because these orgasms are secret,
the change passes undetected by him. Thirdly, her main weapon to
favour her lover is to have fewer nocturnal and masturbatory orgasms
before, and more bypass orgasms during, sex with her lover than with
her partner. Yet again, her favouritism cannot be detected by her
partner.
We can now see why it is as important for a woman to hide her
masturbations and nocturnals from her partner as it is for a man
(Scenes 12 to 14). If a man knew exactly when and how often his
partner masturbated or had nocturnals during their routine sexual
activity, any change in pattern could alert him to the fact that her
body might be anticipating infidelity. With this warning, he could
then be more vigilant, guard her
more intently, and generally make it more difficult for her to collect
anybody else's sperm. Her strategy for influencing the outcome of
sperm warfare, therefore, just like a man's, depends on being able to
change her masturbation and nocturnal patterns without being
detected. Female masturbation and nocturnals have therefore been
shaped to be secretive just as rigorously as male masturbation and
wet dreams. And again, just as for men, it is the involvement of
masturbation and nocturnals in infidelity and sperm warfare that has
generated in women the subconscious urge for secrecy and privacy.
The fact that, by and large, people do not know each other's
masturbation patterns is a testament to the success of that urge. For
all the same reasons that we discussed for men (Scenes 12 to 14), the
urge for privacy and secrecy over masturbation shown by most
women is often matched by their curiosity, suspicion, distaste, and
even prejudice regarding the practice in general.
Of course, women do not always climax in secret. Just like a man,
a woman will sometimes do so in full view of her partner without
them then carrying on to have intercourse (Scene 20). Sometimes she
does so by an open display of masturbation, but most often she does
so with his help. We have already discussed facets of this situation
with respect to oral sex (Scene 10), but often a man stimulates the
woman with only his fingers. Here it is the orgasm itself that is
strategically important to both the man and the woman — not any
information the woman wishes to give or the man wishes to collect
by his smelling and licking of her genitals.
Such open orgasms, without intercourse immediately following,
have exactly the same consequences for sperm retention as a
woman's private masturbation and nocturnals. Studies show that all
three have an equally strengthening effect on her cervical filter,
particularly if at orgasm she still has a large population of sperm in
her cervical crypts. The result is that all three reduce sperm retention
at her next insemination, even if this does not happen until days
later.
For the man, there is an element of reassurance in seeing
224 225SPERM WARS THE CLIMAX OF INFLUENCE
or helping his partner have such an orgasm. His subconscious mind
registers that, if she does have sex with another man over the next
day or so (for example, through infidelity or rape), at least she starts
that intercourse with a strong filter, and any army placed in her tract
will be reduced. Of course, the man's ploy is not infallible, and his
partner can render his preparation ineffectual by having a bypass
orgasm with the other man. Moreover, if, as is most likely, her next
intercourse is with her partner, his preparation will have been
counter-productive — he will have strengthened her filter against
himself.