Nevertheless, one action is a sexual stimulus, the other is not. What
tends to happen in the evolution of sexual stimulation is that
unequivocal signs of sexual interest become stimulating, while other
signs do not. If this were not the case, males and females would be
continually responding sexually to the most irrelevant signals.
For the reasons we have already discussed, male ancestors were
driven by their bodies to seek the valuable information contained in
and around a female's vagina — the inevitable site of insemination.
Failure to seek this information before intercourse cost the male in
four ways: it meant a greater risk of disease, more chance of
inseminating an infertile female, less chance of winning sperm wars,
and a reduced chance of combating infidelity. From the female's
perspective, these pressures on the male meant that, when a male
nuzzled her vulva, it unequivocally signalled his sexual interest. If
she was uninterested, she could simply walk away. If interested, she
needed to prepare for intercourse by lubricating her vagina, and so
forth. Such advance preparation would make the process of
insemination itself more efficient and less damaging. All in all,
females who responded to being nuzzled by an attractive male by
becoming aroused will have reproduced more successfully than those
who did not.
The same arguments apply to the male. If female ancestors
allowed him to nuzzle their vulva, instead of walking away, this
indicated that they were interested in receiving his sperm. Males who
responded by becoming aroused will have missed fewer
opportunities for intercourse than males who did not. All in all, males
who gained sexual stimulation from nuzzling the vulva of a female
will have reproduced more than those who did not.
All of these responses were shaped long before there were
humans. When our species first evolved, the males simply inherited
from our primate ancestors a predisposition for
74 75SPERM WARS
nuzzling, smelling, licking and fingering the female's genitals. We
also, male and female alike, inherited a predisposition to find such
behaviour stimulating.
SCENE 11
Checkmate
The bright-red display on the bedside clock changed from 11:59 to
12:00. It was midnight. While his lover had slept her post-coital
sleep, the man had been clock-watching. Reluctant though he was to
swap the warmth of her bed for the chill air of her room, it really
was time to go.
He gently began to wake her by kissing the middle of her back.
Their affair had begun half a year earlier in a dark summer wood
when, in an unplanned, abandoned moment, they had stripped each
other naked and she had helped him to ejaculate. Two months later,
soon after she had moved into a bed-sitter of her own, they had full
intercourse for the first time. Although they worked in the same
building, they rarely met during the day, taking great care to hide
their liaison from everybody. Two or three times a week, he visited
her bed-sitter for sex. They always went straight to bed. Time was
short — they rarely had more than an hour together. Even so, they
often had sex twice in a session. He was inseminating her about five
times a week, while still inseminating his partner once or twice a
week. His lover was eleven years younger than him, but he had
learned more about sex in six months of snatched moments with her
than he had in ten years with his partner.
For his partner's benefit, he had created a fictitious web of weekly
events at work. These gave him routine, almost infallible, alibis
which freed him to call in on his lover sometimes on his way to
work, sometimes on his way back. Tonight, however, had been
special. This freezing late-January night was his
COUNTING THE COST
lover's birthday and she had insisted on more of his time than the
usual hour. Otherwise, she would spend the evening with friends. In
the end he had invented a story which, he had to admit, seemed
rather good. He had told his partner that a long-term visitor from the
other side of the world, on discovering his interest in chess, had
challenged him to a match and had offered to cook him an authentic
ethnic meal into the bargain. He had reminded his partner that chess
took a long time, that they would probably play the best of three, and
that it could be a long evening, maybe even midnight before he came
home.
The evening had been perfect, a memory for a lifetime. He had
cooked his lover a meal and by seven they were in bed, drinking
wine, listening to music, and playing with each other's bodies as
passion came and went. Altogether it came and went, if with
increasing difficulty, four times. The last time he had only pretended
to ejaculate, but she had climaxed for the second time that evening.
Now, though, their party was over, and ahead of him were two
prospects he could do without — running the gauntlet of arrest for
drunk-driving and, even worse, the guilt and discomfort of having to
fabricate the evening's events to satisfy his partner's curiosity.
He had never quite been able to fathom why he worried so much
about being discovered. It wasn't really the prospect of his partner
leaving him, though he would miss their two children. In truth, it
would worry him more if he lost his lover. Maybe it was his partner's
threat to spend every penny he had rather than let him squander it on
another woman. Or maybe it was her oft-repeated 'joke' that if he
were ever unfaithful she would cut his balls off. He was sure she
didn't mean it. But would he ever feel safe again when she picked up
a pair of scissors or a knife? Whatever the reason, the prospect of
being discovered terrified him.
When his young lover finally surfaced from her sleep, she asked
him not to go, gently at first, then with mounting irritation. Finally,
indicating more than a little disfavour, she
76 77SPERM WARS COUNTING THE COST
told him he must go. He dressed in the cold of her room, kissed her,
hesitated a little in a vain attempt to pacify her, then left to walk to
his car. He always parked two streets away. The police did not stop
him as he drove home, despite a bad few minutes while he appeared
to be being tailed. Thirty minutes after leaving his lover, just after
one o'clock in the morning, he was home — and his partner was
waiting for him.
Hardly had he closed the front door than he was being asked
almost hysterically what was going on. Taken aback, he apologised
for being so late. The games had lasted longer than expected. But he
had won in the end, he added, seeking conviction in detail. She
paused, then asked him why, if he had been playing chess with his
foreign friend all evening, had that very same person phoned a
couple of hours ago and asked to talk to him. The man felt his mouth
freeze open. Panic swept through him. He couldn't believe his bad
luck. In the two years that his colleague had been at his institution,
not once had he phoned. How was it that, of all the nights to break
his silence, he had chosen tonight?
The man's mind raced as his face reddened and his underarms
prickled with sweat. For a moment, he almost told her everything.
Then he lied that it had been his assistant's birthday. He had been
invited to a men's night out of drink, food, strippers and pool. He
knew how much she hated him going on such nights and worried
about him drinking and driving, so he had thought it best not to tell
her.
She stared into his eyes, trying to work out if he was telling the
truth, then went across to the telephone. Pausing, phone in hand, she
asked him for his assistant's number. He said he didn't know. In any
case, the others wouldn't be back yet, because they had gone on to
another club. He had left them to come home because he knew she
would be worried if he was too late. She stared at him again. Not
knowing how to respond, he hid behind laughter. He said this was
silly. He was sorry he had lied to her, but he really had been trying to
save her worry. It wouldn't happen again. He would tell her
next time — and couldn't they please go to bed because he was drunk
and tired.
She moved towards him until their faces were almost touching and
stared into his eyes. She told him he was lying — that she knew he
was lying. Why didn't he smell of smoke and beer? She paused, then
accused him of infidelity. He denied it but she shouted him down,
asking who it was. He proclaimed his innocence yet again and
objected to her refusal to believe him.
She went quiet for a second, thinking hard. Then she told him to
take off his trousers. He protested. She insisted. He said she was
being stupid. Angrily, she began to unzip his trousers. He pushed her
away, told her to stop, and said that he would do it. As he dropped
his trousers and underwear, he hoped against hope that there would
be nothing for her to see or smell. But there was. She swore at him,
slapped his face, told him to leave her, their children and their house,
and said that she never wanted to see him again. When he hesitated,
she pushed him, trousers still round his ankles, towards the door.
At first, he didn't resist but at the door he refused to leave.
Eventually, she agreed to his spending the night on the settee as long
as he had gone by the morning. He spent an uneasy night, unable to
sleep partly through discomfort, partly through worry about the
future, but most of all because he was afraid. The thought that his
partner was about to enter the room, knife or other weapon in hand
and intent on revenge, plagued him all night.
He left early, before she came downstairs, but returned home at
mid-day. With the children at school, they had a long argument. His
partner told him she could never trust him again and that she couldn't
live with someone she couldn't trust. He maintained that the evening
was a one-off. He said the woman was an ex-girlfriend who had
emigrated years ago and then, just last week, had contacted him out
of the blue. About to visit the country again for a few days, she
wanted to look up old friends and to see him again. He had agreed,
78 79SPERM WARS COUNTING THE COST
not expecting anything to happen after all this time. But they had got
drunk, she had invited him back to her hotel and things had just
happened.
He was really sorry. He wished he'd resisted, but she had gone now
and it would never happen again. He'd had time to think and the fear
of losing her and their children had made him realise that all he really
wanted was her, his home and their family. He would leave if she
wanted but did she realise they couldn't afford to keep the house and
pay for a flat for him? If she wanted him gone, they would have to
sell the house and buy something smaller for her and the children.
Was it really worth putting the children through a separation? All
because of a night's weakness on his part that would never happen
again?
In the end she agreed that he could stay but said he would have to
sleep on the bedroom floor. Nor should he imagine he would ever
have sex with her again. Or that she would stay faithful. As soon as
she could find another man, she would be gone, taking the children
with her.
In fact, he was allowed back in her bed after only a few days and
they had sex again after six weeks. He never did tell his lover what
had happened and their affair continued undiminished for another six
months. She then met a man of her own age and ended their
relationship. He stayed with his partner for another five years but
during that time, without her knowing, was unfaithful with three
women. The first, another girl eleven years his junior, conceived
during their affair. But then, after two months, the man she was living
with deserted her, doubting that the child was his, and she miscarried.
Just briefly, he considered leaving his partner for this younger woman
but after some hesitation the girl herself decided she did not want
him.
Ironically, despite his four affairs, it was not his infidelity but his
partner's that eventually ended their fifteen-year-long relationship. As
good as her word, as soon as she met another man she left, taking the
children with her. She didn't know it but her timing was perfect. His
final infidelity had given
him gonorrhea and she departed just in time to avoid being infected
herself.
This was the beginning of the worst phase of his life. With
treatment, he recovered from his infection but was warned by his
doctor, correctly as it turned out, that he might no longer be fertile. He
was forced to sell the house so that his ex-partner could take her share
of the equity. The cost of supporting his two children combined with
losses from two silly financial gambles reduced him almost to penury.
His days of affairs with younger girls apparently over, he moved in
with a widow, ten years older than himself, whose children were
living abroad. After this, life slowly began to improve.
At first his own teenaged children had lived amicably with their
mother and her new partner. But when she began a second family,
relationships in the household became strained. Eventually, his
children moved back to live with him and his new partner. Luckily,
she proved to be a good stepmother, treating his children in the few
years before they left home as if they were her own.
hy is it so important to a woman to prevent or, failing that,
detect her partner's infidelity? What are the repercussions of
failure for her pursuit of reproductive success?
A woman has a lot to lose from her partner's infidelity. And many,
though not all, of the dangers are the same as for a man. First, there is
the risk that she will have to share his wealth, time, energy and other
resources with the other woman. Secondly, there is the danger that he
will eventually leave her for the other woman, reducing his support
for her still further. Whichever of them looks after the children, they
face the dangers of single- or step-parenthood which we discussed in
relation to Scene 9. Thirdly, there is the greater risk of contracting
sexually transmitted diseases, because her partner is at greater risk.
There is one risk, however, that does not
80 81
WSPERM WARS
affect her. Unlike a man, she is in no danger of being tricked into
raising any children by her partner's lover. This means that, on
balance, infidelity is slightly less of a threat to a woman than it is to
a man.
This conclusion is as applicable to monogamous birds, monkeys
and apes as it is to humans. The result is that, although both males
and females of all these species try to prevent their partner from
being unfaithful, males are significantly more possessive of their
partner than are females. They are significantly more aggressive, and
significantly less forgiving. Females may attempt to drive away other
females. They may attempt to intervene between their mate and
another female. They may even desert their young if they receive too
little time and help from their partner. However, since their physical
commitment to preventing infidelity is less than the male's, they are
less likely to desert if their partner is unfaithful. The same is true for
humans.
Women do sometimes wound or kill a partner if he is unfaithful.
They do sometimes wound or kill his lover, leave their partner or
drive him out, and they also sometimes abandon their children to
him to raise. But again, they are less likely to do all of these things
than are men and are more likely to overlook discovered
indiscretions. Nevertheless, the threat of retribution is always there,
and real enough for most men to attempt to hide their infidelity.
Arguably, male animals are never quite as subtle over their
infidelity as females, maybe because the costs of discovery are less.
My favourite description of sophisticated infidelity on the part of the
female concerns a small brown bird, the dunnock. The male and
female, the epitome of contented monogamy, were first seen as they
hopped side by side across a lawn, pecking up morsels of food.
When they reached a bush, the male went round one way, the female
the other. As soon as the bush shielded her from her partner, the
female flew in an instant into dense vegetation nearby. There, she
copulated with a lurking male, then flew back to her position behind
the bush.
COUNTING THE COST
A few seconds later, male and female hopped back into each other's
view, past the bush. Still intently pecking at morsels, the female
acted as if nothing had happened.
Nearly as appealing is the film, shown worldwide, of a female
monkey foraging on the ground for food while being watched
attentively from a high branch by her consort. Alongside her comes
another male. He sits down, innocently picking at himself, hiding his
erection from her consort. Every time the consort's attention is
distracted, the other male taps the female on the shoulder. In an
instant she stands and presents and the male inseminates her. So
quick is their intercourse that by the time her consort looks back in
their direction, they have resumed their previous activities —
innocence personified.
Maybe a female dunnock who flies into vegetation is no more
subtle than a male who hides there, waiting. Maybe a female monkey
who feigns innocence until her partner is distracted is no more
sophisticated than a male who hides his erection and inseminates at
the speed of light. And maybe a woman who has sex with the
window-cleaner while her partner is at the shops is no more
sophisticated than a man who has sex with his secretary in a
cupboard at the office party. But, on balance, one always has the
feeling that the female of the species, whatever the species, has that
slight edge when it comes to ingenuity and imagination. As far as
humans are concerned, the best we can use as evidence is that, taking
thousands of instances into account, the man is more likely, on
average, to have his infidelity discovered than the woman.
In Scene 11, the woman needed to check her mate's genitals only
superficially to confirm his infidelity. Had he been more cautious and
washed himself before returning home, he might have escaped
detection. Had he fabricated a better story, he might, again, have
escaped detection. But he did neither, and suffered the consequences.
From the moment his infidelity was uncovered, his partner decided
that when the right moment came she would leave him, rather than
wait for him to leave her.
82 83SPERM WARS COUNTING THE COST
Had the man's infidelity not been discovered, he would probably
have done better reproductively: at the very least, he would have
had the chance of a third child with his partner. As it was, he did
not. Nor did he manage to compensate for this loss by siring a child
via infidelity or via a second longer-term partner. He nearly
succeeded in fathering a child by another man's partner, but failed.
He nearly attracted another fertile partner through his infidelity, but
failed when it came right down to it. Any further chance he had of
producing children faded when he contracted gonorrhea (at least
half of all human infertility is due to sexually transmitted disease).
Even if he had remained fertile, his age and reduced circumstances
made him less attractive to fertile women. Instead, his major
reproductive strategy became his partnership with an older, probably
post-menopausal, woman — in the sense that, with her help, his
children will probably have left home fully able to realise their
reproductive potential. Eventually, they would give him
grandchildren. Had his infidelity not been discovered, he might have
had more grandchildren, but at least he had some.
Had the woman not discovered her partner's infidelity, she would
probably have done worse reproductively. Of course, she might
have had another child with him. But all the time she was with him,
she would unknowingly have been vulnerable to sudden desertion
and decreased support. As it happened, she would also eventually
have contracted gonorrhea and risked future sterility. Instead, her
discovery helped her to take advantage of his support for five more
years, then pick her moment to leave him for another man and a
second family. She will have ended up with the same number of
grandchildren as him via their mutual children, plus more via the
children in her second family.
Reproductively, infidelity has the potential to benefit both men
and women, as we shall see later in this book. However, as these last
four scenes have shown, it can also be costly even if it is
successfully hidden from the partner. On top of this, however much
a person may suffer from their own infidelity,
they are likely to suffer even more if their partner is unfaithful —
especially if they fail to detect it.
Sometimes the benefits of infidelity will outweigh the costs and
sometimes they will not. As we noted earlier, the reproductive
successes of each generation will be those people who, consciously
or subconsciously, judge correctly when it is and when it is not
advantageous to be unfaithful. Then, when infidelity is judged to be
advantageous, the most successful will be those who hide their own
infidelity while preventing or at least detecting their partner's. The
reproductive failures will be those who misjudge their situation, fail
to hide their own infidelity or fail to prevent or detect their partner's.
Because of these conflicts of interest, there is very little variation
in the strategy shown by men, women and virtually all other species
of animals which form long-term relationships — to attempt secret
infidelity on the one hand while preventing a partner from doing the
same on the other.
84 85SECRET ANTICIPATION
CHAPTER FIVE
Secret
Anticipation
SCENE 12
A Double Life
Another day at work was over, and the man on the fifth floor was just
leaving for home. As he stepped into the lift, his eye was caught by a
new piece of graffiti. He smiled. In colourful slang it implied that the
boss of their section was not to be trusted — because he spent too
much time masturbating.
The lift stopped on the third floor and a young girl stepped in. He
had seen her only once before, but she had immediately won a
starring role in his fantasies. She was new to the section, an extra
secretary for the man who was the target of the graffiti. He watched
her face as the door closed. She saw the words immediately. Her eyes
flicked sideways and caught his. They smiled at each other and she
blushed, but nothing was said. When the lift reached the ground floor
and they stepped out, she turned right and he turned left, heading for
the car park and home.
Thirty minutes later, he drove into his garage. Once in the house
he kissed his partner, admired his children's latest drawings, and
went upstairs to undress for a shower. Even as he was locking the
bathroom door, he was handling his genitals, encouraging an
erection. By the time he had shut the
cubicle door and switched on the shower, his penis was ready for
action. As he pumped himself, he searched through his mind for a
sexual image. For about the tenth time in recent months, he tried
mentally undressing his partner's sister, but the image was losing its
power. He tried undressing her again, this time from the back, but it
still failed. Then he remembered the young girl in the lift. OK, so the
lift breaks down between floors. They both undress, he kneels down,
she stands astride him, begins to crouch in order to sit on his erect
penis, and. . . . But there was no need for an 'and'. With that image,
he ejaculated, flushed the semen down the plughole, then continued
with his shower as if nothing had happened. The whole exercise had
taken about two minutes.
As he showered, he mused over these routine urges to masturbate.
It was as if he had a double life — sex with his partner on Saturday
and Sunday, sex with himself on Tuesday and Thursday. Sometimes
an occasion would be missed, sometimes an occasion would be
gained, but on the whole these were his two routines.
Of course, his sex life with himself was not entirely routine. There
had been the occasional highlight, particularly when he was younger.
A goodnight kiss with a new girl, or a heavy but unconsummated
petting session at a party, had both at one time or another sent him
into a toilet to seek relief in ejaculation. Even now, an erotic scene at
the movies or on TV would sometimes have the same effect. Such
highlights apart, though, his sex life with himself was as much a
routine as his sex life with his partner. Usually, just like tonight, it
was barely even sexual, having more in common with urination and
defecation than with intercourse and sexual excitement. There was
little urgency, little excitement, and little feeling of satisfaction —
just a feeling of relief.
ost men should be able to identify with this scene. For twothirds, their very first ejaculation will have been triggered by
self-stimulation. Over 98 per cent will masturbate
85 87
MSPERM WARS SECRET ANTICIPATION
at some time in their lives. Moreover, virtually all will have done so
by the age of twenty. However, despite such widespread practice, few
men would view their habit of shedding sperm as an important
weapon in their pursuit of reproductive success. Yet this is just what it
is. Scene 12 is the first of three in this chapter, each of which explores
one or more aspects of the shedding of sperm (through masturbation
or 'wet dreams').
How often a man masturbates depends on how old he is and how
often he ejaculates for other reasons. On average, how often he
ejaculates altogether (intercourse, masturbation, and nocturnally) will
closely reflect his rate of sperm production. This varies from man to
man, depending on the size of his testes. It also varies with age. From
almost immediately after puberty to the age of about thirty, an
average man produces around three hundred million sperm a day and
ejaculates between three and four times a week. By the age of fifty
these rates have dropped to about 175 million a day and to twice a
week and, by age seventy-five to about twenty million a day and to
less than once a month. If a man under thirty has intercourse three
times or more a week, he will rarely masturbate. If he has sex only
once a week, he will probably masturbate about twice.
Men are not the only mammals to shed sperm through
masturbation. Dogs, of course, are notorious for such behaviour. One
of their habits is to affectionately clasp a person around the knee with
their front limbs and to rub their genitals up and down the dismayed
person's leg. Albeit using other methods of self-stimulation, a wide
range of other species, such as rats, mice, squirrels, porcupines, pigs,
deer, whales, elephants and monkeys, are also known to shed their
sperm. Just like men, the males of these species will often masturbate
between routine inseminations of females.
Masturbation may not seem a very sophisticated activity, but it is.
It is the means by which an active, or hopeful, man tailors his next
inseminate to its likely circumstances. By anticipating what those
circumstances might be, he can use masturbation to adjust the age and
number of sperm he will then introduce
into the potential female. Not only that, but he can also adjust what
proportion of those sperm will be blockers, killers and egg-getters.
A man's body can distinguish between masturbation and
insemination. The ejaculates produced are not identical. Many factors
influence the number of sperm introduced during intercourse — such
as how many are needed to top up his partner and to succeed in
warfare, given the perceived level of risk. But, apart from a man's age,
only one major factor — time since last ejaculation — affects the
number shed during masturbation. When a man masturbates, he voids
about five million sperm for every hour since he last ejaculated. This
seems to be the rate at which sperm exceed their sell-by date as
blockers, killers and egg-getters.
Sperm change their roles as they age. Most are killers when they
are young and blockers when they are old. Killers need to be full of
energy and movement and to have a cap full of lethal chemicals
(Scene 7). Blockers, however, can be old. Or, to put it another way,
the only use for geriatric sperm is as blockers. To block a cervical
channel, a sperm needs to have just enough energy to swim out of the
seminal pool and travel a little way into the cervical mucus. Then it
can simply coil its tail and sit still. It can even die if it wants. The
channel will still be blocked.
Egg-getters also change with age. Important chemical changes
have to take place on an egg-getter's surface before it can penetrate an
egg, changes that do not occur until the sperm gets close to the
fertilisation zone in an oviduct. As a result, an egg-getter's life is
divided into two phases of activity. It has its first burst of energy
before it is fertile — this is when it surf-boards and swims to the rest
area in an oviduct. Then, during its brief phase of fertility, it has a
second burst of energy-when it reaches, then swims through, the zone
of fertilisation. After that, it dies.
The two columns of sperm queuing to be ejaculated (Scene 4) are
not just a homogenous, characterless mixture. Inevitably, those at the
front of the queue, near the man's urethra, are the
88 89SPERM WARS SECRET ANTICIPATION
oldest. The ones at the back, way down in his testes, are the youngest.
There may be some mixing of ages as the sperm are loaded into the
urethra. Even so, when he places his seminal pool at the top of a
woman's vagina, the oldest sperm tend to be introduced first and go to
the bottom of the pool. Younger sperm arrive in later spurts and go to
the top.
The younger sperm, being more active, will be the first to enter the
cervical mucus. Older sperm leave the pool more slowly. Very old
sperm cannot leave the pool at all and are doomed to be ejected by
the woman in her flowback. From their position higher up in the
seminal pool, the younger sperm may have to swim down through
groups of older ones before they can swim up and enter the elephant's
trunk of the cervix. Much depends on how deeply the cervix dips into
the pool. Too many old sperm in the pool hinder the youngsters as
they try to escape into the cervix.
Masturbation between intercourses usually means that a man
inseminates his partner with fewer sperm than if he had not
masturbated. However, the sperm he introduces are younger, more
dynamic, and less hindered by supernumerary geriatric sperm. As a
result, just as many, if not more, manage to escape the seminal pool
and stay in the woman. Moreover, the sperm which escape are
younger and more active — altogether a more efficient army.
All the same, a man needs to inject some old sperm as blockers —
as many as are needed to top up the population of blockers in his
partner's cervical mucus. For three days after a couple's last routine
intercourse, the ageing of sperm in a man's tubes tracks the loss of
blockers in his partner's cervix with exquisite precision. Given any
gap between successive intercourses of from thirty minutes to three
days, he can introduce into his partner the perfect ejaculate to top up
her population of blockers. Once the gap exceeds three to four days,
however, his sperm queue develops an excess of blockers. This
happens because there are only so many channels in the cervical
mucus, and once he has enough old sperm to block these, any
further blockers are redundant. In fact, they are worse than redundant,
for they probably hinder the escape of his younger sperm from the
seminal pool into the cervix. Beyond a certain point, therefore, the
man's best policy is to shed the oldest part of his column of sperm
before inseminating a woman, rather than leaving them for her to eject
in her flowback. This is one of the functions of masturbation.
If the gap between inseminations exceeds four days, the ideal
inseminate is produced by masturbating two days before the next
intercourse. This gives a man two sperm columns, each with about
twenty million aged blockers at the front of the queue and from a
hundred million to five hundred million younger blockers and killers
further back. Scattered among these younger sperm are egg-getters, in
a ratio of about one egg-getter to ninety-nine kamikaze types. About
10 per cent of the egg-getters are already at their peak of fertility and
will go immediately to the oviduct. The remainder will reach their
peak at different times over the five days after insemination.
This profile allows a man maximum flexibility in adjusting his
sperm army according to the risk of warfare. If he has guarded his
partner closely since they last had sex, he needs to introduce into her a
full quota of blockers but only a few killers and egg-getters. So he
injects all of the blockers at the front of the queue, plus a small portion
of the queue behind containing the killers and egg-getters. If he has
spent less time with her, so that the risk of sperm warfare is greater, he
needs more killers and egg-getters. So he ships in more of each
column. The number of blockers stays the same, but he introduces
more of the younger sperm, the killers and egg-getters.
In order to have a two-day-old column of sperm waiting to be
introduced, a man needs to anticipate his next intercourse with his
partner. Subconsciously, the brain must play a major role in this
anticipation. The urges that men get to masturbate are timed by their
brains and bodies to achieve this gap between masturbation and
intercourse. The man in Scene 12 most often masturbates on Tuesdays
and Thursdays in routine anticipation
90 91SPERM WARS SECRET ANTICIPATION
of sex on Saturdays. Occasionally, he may masturbate only on
Wednesdays. The result is that he rarely inseminates his partner with
an ejaculate older than three days or younger than two. This should
mean that, at each intercourse, the army he injects is ideal for the
circumstances. More often than not, of course, an army is unnecessary:
no war takes place, and all he really needs is to introduce a few million
egg-getters of different ages. But, just in case his partner has been or
might be unfaithful, he injects a measured number of blockers and
killers.
The major reproductive problem a man encounters with routine
masturbation is that there is an unpredictable element to routine sex.
As we have seen, this unpredictability is generated largely by the
conflict between men and women over the function of routine sex, and
the problem occurs when anticipated inseminations fail to materialise
(though spontaneous and unexpected seduction by his partner can also
be problematic).
For example, thanks to his masturbation routine, the man in Scene
12 arrives for intercourse each Saturday night with an ideal ejaculate
waiting in his tubes — a balanced mixture of blockers, killers and egggetters. Suppose, however, that one Saturday night the couple argue,
pass out through drink, or experience any one of the myriad
circumstances that can prevent them having intercourse. On Sunday,
the man now has in his tubes an ejaculate that is rapidly going past its
best. His body then has the choice of either waiting for the next
intercourse or masturbating. If he waits for the next intercourse, he
will introduce in his partner an ejaculate that is on the old side of its
prime, with too many geriatric blockers and many ageing killers and
egg-getters. On the other hand, if he masturbates, but then
unexpectedly has the chance of intercourse with his partner only an
hour or so later, he will introduce an ejaculate short on blockers.
Neither alternative is ideal and could put him at a disadvantage if
either of those ejaculates really does have to fight a sperm war.
This problem for the man is an opportunity for the woman. One
way she can maneuver her partner into injecting a sub-optimal army is
to change their sex routine unexpectedly. If she
is then unfaithful in the next few days, her lover's army will have the
advantage (Scenes 6 and 26).
Scene 13
Multiply, But Don't Divide
The evening flight had taken three hours. Arriving just after midnight,
the four business colleagues, two men and two women, had taken a
taxi from the airport and gone straight to their hotel. Their rooms were
all on the same corridor. As they unlocked their respective doors, the
man said goodnight to his three associates, then went into his room.
They all had an early start in the morning.
Once unpacked, he undressed and showered. The room was very
hot. Too restless to sleep, he lit a cigarette, then lay naked on his bed,
staring at the ceiling. Handling his cigarette dextrously with one hand
and his genitals abstractedly with the other, a kaleidoscope of thoughts
began to pass through his head. Momentary images of his children
flitted by — followed closely by images of his partner. Remembering
their last intercourse, two nights ago, he mused over whether she had
really climaxed. Or had she been faking? Perhaps her performance
had been a gift to him, a memory to take on his trip. If so, it was a pity
their mutual sexual act had been superseded. The following night, the
one before his trip, he had slipped into the bathroom and masturbated
while she was on the phone to her mother.
His thoughts turned to his companions and his strategy for the next
two days. He could hardly have been luckier. The two most desirable
women in the organisation were both on the trip, and he had two
nights in which to try to bed them. Not for the first time since the trip
had been announced, he toyed with the idea of being in bed with them
both at the same time. He imagined
92 93SPERM WARS
them naked, writhing over his body, each begging him to enter her
first.
As his fantasy unfolded, his penis grew in his hand and his brain
whispered that maybe he would like to ejaculate. He stayed on the
bed for a while, enjoying his fantasies and the growing sensation in
his genitals. Then, when the time came, he went over to the
washbasin and finished himself off. Later, as he drifted off to sleep,
he wondered how well the next two evenings would match his
fantasy.
The following evening, back in his hotel room, he phoned home.
After talking for ten minutes, he sent his love to the children, blew
his partner a kiss, and rang off. Reassured that everything was as it
should be with his family, he went to his fifth-floor window and
looked out over the city skyline. Perhaps his wasn't a bad job, after
all. Business was over for the day. Now all he had to do was look
forward to the evening with his three colleagues. There would be
food, drink and, with any luck, sex.
The evening began well but ended badly. In the taxi to the
restaurant, he sat next to the woman he most wanted to see in his bed
and interpreted her body language favourably. However, as soon as
they hit the city bars, it was obvious she preferred the other man, his
boss. As the evening progressed, he could do nothing but watch as
they became more and more physical. He made a few vain attempts
to get between them but she virtually ignored him. Trying to make
the best of the situation, he turned his attention to his second choice.
But after a few drinks she began complaining of feeling tired and
unwell. He suggested accompanying her back to the hotel, hoping the
evening might not yet be over — but it was. At the hotel, she made
her excuses and went straight to her room. He stayed in the hotel bar
for a while, then went to his own room.
All he had left for the evening were his fantasies. For the third
night running, he masturbated before going to bed. It was like being a
teenager again, masturbating nearly every day for a week or so at a
time. He slept only fitfully. At two in the morning he heard his boss
and the woman come back and, as far as he could
94
SECRET ANTICIPATION
tell, both went into his boss's room. At five he thought he heard her
leaving.
The following evening was quite different. The boss ignored his
conquest of the night before and made immediate overtures to the
other woman. Without hesitation, she responded warmly. He tried to
capitalise on the turn of events, but for a while the jilted woman was
single-mindedly sullen. Then suddenly, almost as if a switch had been
flicked, she began to respond to his advances. Eventually, he realised
that her responsiveness had more to do with making his boss jealous
than with genuine interest, but he made the most of it. She became
very drunk and by the time the four of them arrived back at the hotel,
he thought she was either going to pass out or throw up. He was
undecided whether he should try to have sex with her, but she made
the decision for him.
Waiting until the boss and the other woman could see what was
happening, she grabbed his arm and virtually dragged him into her
room. Once in, she fell on to the bed and began a verbal assault on
their two companions. Her tirade scarcely faltered, even when he
undressed and then entered her. As he had masturbated three times in
the last three days, and as he was fairly drunk, intercourse was long.
He needed many minutes of thrusting before he began to feel like
ejaculating. His concentration wasn't helped by the way the woman
scarcely seemed to know he was inside her. Throughout his sexual
performance, she never once stopped talking.
After he had ejaculated, she gradually ran out of verbal steam and
fell into a drunken sleep. Two hours later, he tried to have sex with
her sleeping body. But she woke and, with irritation in her voice and
manner, told him to stop and leave. She wanted to sleep — but first,
she had to be sick. In the end he gave up, got out of bed, and went
back to his own room. He was just in time to see the second woman
closing the boss's door and crossing the corridor, naked buttocks
peeping out from the clothes she was clutching round her front.
The four missed each other at breakfast and did not meet until
95SPERM WARS SECRET ANTICIPATION
it was time to take a taxi to the airport. There was an uneasy
politeness, and nothing was said of the night's events. At the airport,
the man bought toys for his children and perfume for his partner.
The woman whose bed he had shared the night before spent most of
the flight in the toilet, being sick.
That evening, back at home, he told his partner he thought his
boss had had sex with both of the women. Responding to her
questioning, he denied that he had found either of them attractive.
Later that evening, unusually for a Thursday, he and his partner had
sex, and over the next few days life at home and at work returned to
normal.
Two months later, the woman who had slept with both men on
the business trip announced her pregnancy. There was some story
about being sick and her pill failing, but the man never quizzed her
too closely. Six months after the business trip, he met the woman
and her partner at a party. As he listened to the certainty with which
the couple spoke about their forthcoming baby, even he began to
wonder if he had really ever had sex with her.
he role of masturbation in a man's pursuit of reproductive
success is not limited to its role in routine sex (Scene 12). In
fact, in many ways, it becomes a much more potent weapon in his
preparation for infidelity and sperm warfare.
As we discussed in Scene 12, most of a man's sex life with
himself is just as routine as his sex life with his partner. Not
surprisingly, as routine sex is the main focus of his sexual activity,
it is this to which his body is most finely adjusted. But infidelity
introduces a non-routine element into his sex life with his partner —
and, therefore, into his sex life with himself as well.
When a man has an opportunity to inseminate a woman other
than his partner, he has a problem. The ejaculate waiting in his
sperm tubes is tailored to top up his partner, and so is relatively rich
in blockers. What he needs for infidelity,
however — if it is to be reproductively successful — is an ejaculate
rich in killers and egg-getters. The woman he is about to inseminate
has an above average chance of containing sperm from another man,
especially if she has a regular partner. She will already have blocking
sperm in her cervix. These may or may not need topping up,
depending on how recently she has had sex, but blockers are not a
lover's main concern. What he needs is young, active sperm that can
get through the cervix in numbers and prevail in combat. Blockers
are at best a luxury; at worst a hindrance. As with the man in Scene
13, once the brain begins to anticipate infidelity, the body increases
the masturbation rate, thereby producing and maintaining a young,
killer-rich ejaculate in his tubes, ready and waiting for action. The
ideal inseminate for infidelity is one that has been waiting to be
ejaculated for no more than about twenty-four hours
Another situation in which the ideal inseminate is twenty-four
hours old or less occurs when a man has no regular sexual partner.
(All men have such a phase during adolescence, and many have
additional such phases later on when 'between partners'.) In this
situation too, he needs to keep his sperm column young and in a state
of continuous readiness — intercourse and sperm warfare could be
just around the corner. As he searches for a sexual opportunity, he
needs a waiting ejaculate that is heavily dominated by young,
energetic killers and egg-getters primed to head straight for the
oviducts. Frequent masturbation maintains such an ejaculate —
hence the appropriate urges experienced by single men.
Almost as interesting as the function of masturbation is its secrecy
and lack of social acceptability. Among humans, it is most often
conducted in private. It is often also the target of prejudice. The
graffiti artist in the lift in Scene 12 has his counterparts all over the
world. Everywhere, people vilify men for masturbating, often using
terms of abuse specific to the behaviour. So strong is this social
disapproval that many cultures and religions actually outlaw the
activity. Even
96 97
TSPERM WARS
in cultures that stop short of outlawing it, stories and folklore may
exist (such as 'masturbation leads to blindness') that are designed to
scare men into refraining. The irony, of course, is that the graffiti
artist and all his counterparts world-wide will almost certainly
practise masturbation themselves. So why is masturbation so often
surrounded by secrecy, prejudice and hypocrisy?
If a man is to hide infidelity from his partner, it is important that
there is no overt change in his behaviour: any change could alert her
to his new situation. He cannot, for example, alter their usual sex
routine. Nor — if she is aware of it at all — must his partner notice
a change in his masturbation routine. As we have seen, a sudden
increase in his masturbation rate could mean he is anticipating
infidelity. A sudden decrease could mean he is already being
unfaithful, ejaculating so often through intercourse that he would
gain no benefit from masturbation.
Assuming, again, that he had always been secretive about his
masturbating, he has two options. The first is to maintain his usual
routine. But if he does this, he injects inefficient sperm armies into
his lover. The alternative is to continue to be generally secretive
over his masturbation so that no change in routine can be noticed. It
is, of course, no threat to a man's strategy if his partner detects an
occasional episode. In fact, deliberately allowing detection can
sometimes be a strategy in itself — especially if it reassures or misleads. A man need worry only if his partner detects so many
occasions that she is able to work out his whole masturbation
routine.
Obviously, secrecy is most important once males have partners,
or are competing for partners. Then, masturbation patterns need to
be hidden not only from the partner but also from other males.
Imagine a situation in which a man allowed a male friend to know
his routine. Then his body urged him to increase his masturbation
rate in anticipation of infidelity — with the friend's partner! Just in
case such a situation might arise, it is far better
SECRET ANTICIPATION
for a man to hide his masturbation routine from everybody in the first
place. Only among groups of adolescent males without partners is
such secrecy perhaps less important. All adolescents know that they
are each on the lookout for intercourse. Frequent masturbation, even
if obvious to other partnerless males, gives little away.
The secrecy which surrounds masturbation is therefore
understandable, given its function in the context of reproductive
success. So, too, is prejudice and hypocrisy. Since the aim of
masturbation is to give the male an edge over others in sperm
warfare, he gains most if he masturbates but can dissuade those
around him from doing so. That way, he gains competitive benefits
that his rivals do not. The world-wide tendency to criticise, even
victimise, other people for masturbating while continuing to
masturbate oneself is thus as strategic as masturbation itself.
There is one further element in Scene 13 that should be discussed
now — alcohol. This is, and has been (probably for many thousands
of years), an important factor in many people's sex lives. It also has a
very well documented effect on sexual behaviour. The more men and
women drink, the more they both seek intercourse — or, at least, the
less they resist it. Perversely, however, beyond a certain level of
intoxication, both men and women find it more difficult to become
aroused. Men find erection more difficult — the 'brewer's droop'
syndrome — and women find their vaginas, and often their clitorises,
less sensitive. This secondary effect eventually makes intercourse
impossible for a man, but not for a woman. Thus, the more men
drink, the more they want sex but the less able they are to have it. In
contrast, the more women drink, the more they want and can have
sex. It is just that, beyond a certain point, they may not enjoy it
much.
Alcohol does not negate any of the strategies we discuss in this
book. All of the patterns are still there: for example, women still
show a menstrual cycle of varying sexual interest. Even under the
influence of alcohol, they are still more likely to be unfaithful
98 99SPERM WARS SECRET ANTICIPATION
didn't fully wake until he felt the semen trickling over his belly,
down his side, and on to the bottom sheet. He groaned inwardly and
wiped the ejaculate off his body with the top sheet.
That was his first wet dream for a year. He turned over, away
from the rapidly cooling wet patch. Briefly, he was an adolescent
again, worrying how he could hide the patch from his mother in the
morning. At times during his early teenage years, he had even worried
about going to bed at all in case he ejaculated. It was bad enough at
home, but if ever he stayed at a friend's house he could scarcely sleep
all night for fear of leaving his mark. Eventually, he had discovered
that if he masturbated before going to sleep when away from home,
wet dreams rarely happened.
Since then, these nocturnal surprises had virtually disappeared from
his life. Now, in his early thirties, they were a rare event. The last
time, a year ago, was when he had flu and a slight fever. Then his
partner had reacted badly on discovering the mark on the sheet,
claiming it was a slight on her sexual attractiveness — and how
could he be feeling like sex if he was ill, anyway? He wondered if she
would react the same way this time. But, unlike during adolescence,
the thought of being discovered did not keep him awake. Within a
minute, he had drifted back into sleep.
or one in five men, their very first ejaculation occurs
spontaneously. Most often, this first occurrence is a wet dream,
but for a few unfortunate boys it occurs in public. This is usually
due to subliminal stimulation (watching a film, climbing a tree), or
extreme stress (reading in front of a class at school). After the first
few occasions, however, almost all spontaneous ejaculations occur
in private, at night, while asleep — as wet dreams. At some time in
their lives, over 80 per cent of men experience these nocturnal
events. So, how do they help a man in his pursuit of reproductive
success?
Wet dreams can occur at any time of life, but are most common in
the teens and early twenties, and are most likely after periods of
abstinence from intercourse and masturbation. But only during the
teens do they occur often enough to be a direct substitute for other
outlets. The adolescent's body aims to ejaculate at least three times a
week, and if he omits to do so via masturbation (or intercourse, if he
is lucky), wet dreams act as insurance.
During adolescence, wet dreams probably tailor the ejaculate just
as precisely as masturbation. Later, they occur much too rarely to be
part of the three-a-week system. From his mid-twenties onwards,
even if a man fails to ejaculate via intercourse or masturbation for
days or even weeks, wet dreams may not occur. He will still get
virtually nightly erections during REM sleep (the deepest kind) and
dreams, but his body seems to inhibit ejaculation.
After adolescence, nocturnal ejaculations are probably most likely
to occur when the sperm waiting to exit have been damaged in some
way. A high temperature, for example, during flu or other infections,
can kill or damage these waiting sperm. The body still generates an
urge to masturbate under such circumstances, but if the man gets no
opportunity for secrecy during the day, the body forces a wet dream
to rid his sperm columns of these moribund tenants at night.
Humans are by no means the only species to ejaculate spontaneously. Rats, cats and probably most mammals will from time to
time ejaculate in their sleep, especially around puberty. In men, it is
sleeping with a partner that most often seems to mark the change
from the function of wet dreams as a back-up in his three-a-week
system, to their being rare events.
As we have already discussed (Scene 13), the timing and frequency with which a man sheds sperm can give a clear indication to
an observer both of his current sexual activity and of his
expectations. Secrecy is important to the success of male strategy,
and it is probably this need for secrecy that has caused men's bodies
to avoid wet dreams as sexual outlets once they have a partner. They
are not as easy to hide from a partner as masturbation, because the
evidence remains on the sheet. Since a man has much more control
over when and where he ejaculates during masturbation, wet dreams
are a suitable back-up for masturbation only in young men without a
partner.
102 103
FSUCCESSFUL FAILURE
CHAPTER SIX
Successful Failure
SCENE 15
Home for the Day
The soldier stopped pedalling and allowed his bicycle to free-wheel
down the steep hill. He welcomed the brief moment of relaxation. It
was over two hours since he had cycled out of his barracks in the
heat of the June evening. Now, as the sun dipped towards the horizon
behind him, he still needed another half-hour to get home. His bike
had no lights, but he might just arrive before it would matter. As he
gathered speed and the fields and hedgerows raced past him, he
could scarcely believe his luck, both bad and good. The bad luck was
that, for some wartime reason, the whole barracks was being moved
much further away from his home. The good luck was that he had
been given an unexpected twenty-four-hour leave. He had his bike,
he had the strength and energy, and he certainly had the motivation.
A three-hour ride? Nothing to it.
His partner didn't know he was coming home. For a moment she
was stunned when, just as it was getting dark, the back door opened.
Her two daughters, aged eleven and seven, were upstairs, asleep.
Otherwise, she was alone in the house. When she identified the
intruder, she was both pleased and unnerved. Pleased, because she
missed his company during the long weeks between visits home.
Pleased, because she had been feeling sexually frustrated for days.
Unnerved, because if he
had arrived an hour earlier he would have found another man in the
house.
So far, her genuine claims of fidelity during his long absences had
always been accepted — eventually. Her position in such pleadings
was particularly vulnerable because her elder daughter was not his,
and he knew it. She was the product of a springtime indiscretion. As
a twenty-two-year-old farm girl, she had allowed herself to be
coerced into sex with the man for whom she worked. Never would
the woman forget that day, twelve years ago, that nearly ruined her
life. Even now, the man's eyes still stared at her in her dreams and
from her daughter's face.
On finding she was pregnant, she had lost her job, her mother's
love, and her freedom. She was banished, first to live with her
grandmother for a few months during the most obvious phase of her
pregnancy, and then to a confinement in the house of a tyrannical,
moralistic midwife. There was no doubt that she owed this soldier
who had just walked through the door a lifetime's gratitude for
offering to take on and support her and her baby daughter. And he
had done this despite the opposition of his own parents and despite
the prejudice of the villagers in whose community they lived and
worked. Four years after they had met, she had given him his own
daughter, the consequence of New Year celebrations — but he
desperately wanted a son. Maybe if war hadn't broken out, they
would have had another child. But it did, and they hadn't.
He enjoyed the camaraderie of army life, but constantly worried
about what his partner was doing back at home. Knowing this, she
shuddered at what might have happened had he arrived home and
found another man in the house. In fact, her relationship with this
other man had so far been totally platonic. But she knew his
intentions were far from innocent and tonight, for the first time, she
had found herself being tempted. Who knows what would have
happened if the girls had gone to bed at their proper time, instead of
staying up as unwitting chaperons?
After a welcoming hug and kiss, she told her partner to wash
104 105SPERM WARS SUCCESSFUL FAILURE
away his cyclist's sweat while she prepared what food she could
from a temporarily thin larder. He waited until they were in bed and
becoming aroused before breaking the news to her that he'd had no
chance to buy or borrow any condoms. She protested that the last
thing she wanted at the moment was a baby. He said it would be all
right because he would withdraw before he came. Maybe it didn't
matter anyway, she said, because her period was due any day.
He didn't withdraw, either then, first thing in the morning, or
again in the early afternoon. An hour later he was gone, cycling the
three-hour journey back to his barracks and imminent relocation.
Even as he cycled, one of his sperm was entering his partner's egg,
and by the time he saw her again she was experiencing pregnancy
sickness. A few months later, during the hottest week in March for
twenty years, his son was born.
Fifty years later, the woman would have seven grandchildren, the
soldier six-one from his daughter, and five from the son conceived
when he was home for that day in June.
ach of the three scenes in this chapter deals with a situation in
which a different woman appears in some way to fail. Yet in
failing, each actually benefits — as if her failure were strategic. In
Scene 15 we encounter a woman who is apparently convinced that
the last thing she wants is to conceive. However, not only does she
fail to avoid conception, but her body goes to some lengths to make
sure that she does. Fifty years later it is clear that her body had
engineered a very successful failure — a real bonus in her pursuit of
reproductive success.
The conscious reason that this woman allowed unprotected sex,
even though she didn't want to conceive, was because she thought
conception was unlikely. Her spur-of-the-moment reasoning was
that it was so long since her last period that her next must be due any
day. But as we noted in Scene 2, and as she soon discovered, the
human menstrual cycle is nowhere near as predictable as many
people think.
Just about the only reliable element in the cycle is that once a
woman has ovulated she will menstruate fourteen days later (but see
below). Everything else is highly variable, as her body contrives to
make itself unpredictable to men. Particularly crucial to her strategy
is the tremendous variation in the number of days from the end of
menstruation to ovulation. This variation (which we shall soon
discuss further), however, is only one element in her unpredictability.
Another less well known feature is that even apparently normal
cycles are by no means always fertile: a woman experiencing such
cycles may not in fact be ovulating at all. Scattered among her fertile
cycles, every healthy, fertile woman routinely also has infertile ones.
There are at least three different types of infertile menstrual cycle
— and most women experience them all. In the first type, a woman
neither menstruates nor produces an egg. In the second, she
menstruates normally, but still does not produce an egg. In the third,
she both menstruates and ovulates, but curtails (from fourteen days
to about ten) the normally consistent interval from ovulation to
menstruation. This curtailment prevents a fertilised egg from
implanting.
In the short term, phases of infertility are an important method by
which a woman's body subconsciously seeks to do two things: on the
one hand, to confuse men; and on the other, to organise the number
and spacing of children over a lifetime. Only if such infertile phases
persist for long periods, such as several years, might they indicate a
problem. Even then, they may still be part of a woman's natural
subconscious ability to plan her family.
The proportion of cycles that are fertile varies in a fairly
predictable way throughout a woman's life. Obviously, she does not
ovulate during childhood, though she may ovulate before having her
first period. And even once she has begun to have periods, few
cycles are fertile. By the age of twenty, a normal, healthy woman
produces an egg in fewer than half of her cycles. Even at her peak,
when around thirty years old, still only about 80 per cent of cycles
are fertile. After thirty, the proportion begins to decline, slowly at
first, then rapidly after she reaches forty.
106 107
ESPERM WARS
By fifty, women more or less cease to ovulate, though there are
unconfirmed reports of women giving birth up to the age of seventy.
What seems to happen in each cycle is that in the days after the
beginning of a period, a woman's body goes through a series of
hormonal changes. These changes prepare her body to produce an
egg but, about one or two days before ovulation can occur, her body
goes on hold. Whether she eventually produces an egg or not
depends on the events of the following few days, or even weeks.
This holding period is an opportunity to collect sperm, perhaps just
from her partner, perhaps not — perhaps just from one man, perhaps
from two or more. In part, whether or not she ovulates will depend
on how her body feels about the man or men from whom she has
collected sperm. Most of all, however, it will depend on how it feels
about trying to produce a baby in the current circumstances.
The woman in Scene 15 thought her next period must soon be due
because it was so long since her last one. She was wrong. Her body
was on hold. In the absence of her partner for the foreseeable future,
it had momentarily considered collecting sperm from another man.
But when it collected sperm from her partner, it responded by
producing an egg. Consciously, the woman thought it was a bad
time to conceive, but her body knew better. Given that it was eight
years since she had last conceived and that her ability to have and
raise a third child would soon begin to decline, now was precisely
the time to conceive — especially as it was June.
Many mammals, such as squirrels, sheep and bears, breed only at
a particular time of year. This way, their bodies can time giving
birth and raising young to coincide with the best weather and the
greatest availability of food. In contrast, most of the larger monkeys
and apes, living in more uniform tropical environments, will breed
at any time of year. Nevertheless, conceptions and births are not
evenly spread throughout the seasons: more still occur in some
months than in others. Humans are just the same.
108
SUCCESSFUL FAILURE
At the latitude of Britain and Canada, more babies are born in
early spring (February and March) than at any other time of year.
There is a second, smaller peak in early autumn (September). At the
latitude of Central America, more babies are born at the coolest time
of year (December/January). In the southern hemisphere, the birth
seasons are the same as in the northern. But the months, of course,
are half a year different.
Just as these seasonal birth peaks reflect peaks of conception nine
months earlier, so do these peaks of conception reflect peaks of
ovulation. Suppose Scene 15 was set in Britain. There, women are
more likely to produce an egg in May/June and December than in
any other month of the year. If the scene had been enacted in
October rather than June, the outcome might have been very
different. In October, even if the woman's body had been on hold,
she might not have responded to intercourse by ovulating. But it was
June. Moreover, she was thirty-four years old, it was eight years
since she last conceived, and her body rarely had the chance to
collect sperm. Despite what her brain might have thought, her body
decided on that summer day that it was actually a very good moment
to conceive — and it was right.
Fifty years later, her son had not only survived, he had given her
five grandchildren. The average number for women living at her time
and in her society is likely to have been four. Without her son, she
would have had only two grandchildren, half the average. Because
she had had her son, she achieved seven grandchildren in all, nearly
twice the average, giving her every chance that her descendants
would be present in the generations to come.
The man, of course, did not fare quite as well as the woman from
their partnership. But he still fared quite well, and for him the son
was even more important — without him, he would have had only
one grandchild. Then there would have been a very real danger that
accident or infertility would rob him of all descendants within a
generation or two (Scene 1). Because he had had his son, he too
achieved an above-average number of grandchildren. So from the
point of view of his reproductive
109SPERM WARS
success it had been a good decision to take on this woman, despite
the cost of raising her daughter from another man. It had also been a
good decision to take on a three-hour cycle ride in the heat of that
June day.
SCENE 16
The Stress of It All
As the woman fingered the piece of paper in her hand, tears began to
roll down her cheeks. Ironically, only yesterday she had thought that
things couldn't get any worse.
Seven years ago, when she and her partner had first started living
together, the future had looked bright. But, somehow, it had all gone
wrong. Maybe they shouldn't have overstretched themselves
financially with their first house. Maybe they shouldn't have spent so
much on holidays and entertainment in the first few years together.
Maybe they should have seen the danger signs earlier and drawn in
their horns when they began to slip into debt. But her partner had
insisted they could manage. Promotion and solvency were always
just around the corner. But now, seeing this final demand, she
realised things were never going to get better. As she sobbed, it
seemed to her as if life had been one long chapter of stress and
unhappiness.
It had begun ten years ago. In her late teens she had become
involved with a brilliant young man. But their relationship was
fraught. He had been continually critical of her body and general
appearance and had refused on principle to use, or allow her to use,
any forms of contraception other than rhythm and withdrawal.
Haunted by the fear of pregnancy and obsessed by the fear of
becoming fat, she had lapsed into anorexia. After a year of despair,
she finished with him, counselled herself out of her eating problems,
and eventually qualified with distinction for the career she had
always wanted. Two years later, she
SUCCESSFUL FAILURE
met her current partner and they began living together almost
immediately.
For four years, they had always been able to find an excuse to wait
'just another month or so' before having a family. More than anything,
they were waiting for his promotion — but it never came. Eventually,
despite their financial problems, they decided to wait no longer. Part
of her motivation had stemmed from her secret hope that a family
would draw them back together again — because as their debts had
mounted so their relationship had deteriorated. More and more
frequently, irritability had begun to give way to open hostility.
To her dismay, she hadn't conceived. Month after month went by,
and she began to worry that she was infertile. As it turned out, her
fears were unfounded. But it took nearly a year of unprotected sex
before, relaxing on a holiday they couldn't afford, she eventually
conceived. Then, nearly three months later, her partner lost his job
and within a week she miscarried.
From that tragic moment, their lives had gone from bad to worse.
The house was repossessed and they were forced to move from one
rented accommodation to another. With each move, as they struggled
to manage on her income, they lowered their sights and their standard
of living. Their current flat was cramped. Although pleasant enough
in summer, it was cold, damp and mouldy in winter. Eventually, her
partner had got another job, less well paid than the first but at least
with prospects. By then, however, they were so far in debt they had
no choice but to stay in their cheap flat, waiting for financial
recovery.
During the worst of their deprivations they rarely had sex, and
whole months sometimes passed without intercourse. With her
partner's new employment, however, their sexual interest in each
other returned. But it was now two years since her miscarriage, and
still she had not conceived. Their finances were slowly improving, but
their standard of living was still far worse than they had originally
expected it would be by now. They still
110 111SPERM WARS SUCCESSFUL FAILURE
argued frequently, sometimes violently, and often had bouts of illhealth.
Suddenly, she stopped crying, screwed up the paper and threw it at
the wall. Her mind was made up. She scribbled a note to her partner
and walked out of the door. At the end of the street, she went into a
telephone kiosk and dialled a familiar number. When the man
answered, she gave him the message he had been waiting all month to
hear: if his offer was still open, she was ready to leave her partner and
move in with him.
Ten minutes later, she was in his car. Thirty minutes after that,
they were in his house in the suburbs. Ever since their affair began,
he had been trying to persuade her to move in. His house was nothing
special, but compared to the pit in which she was living it was a
palace. Although maintenance payments to his ex-partner were a
drain, he was not in debt, his house was warm, dry and well
appointed, and he had a car.
She spent most of the day in tears and most of the night having
sex. The next morning, she went back to her flat to collect her
belongings. Her new partner wanted to accompany her, but she
wouldn't let him and took a taxi instead. Her ex-partner was in bed
when she arrived. As she collected her clothes and other possessions,
the arguments and recriminations reverberated around the bedroom.
He eventually collapsed in tears. Then, begging her not to go, he told
her how much he still cared for her.
She responded in a way that later she still could not believe. As he
sobbed, she suddenly remembered the athletic, ambitious and
arrogant young man she had once found so attractive. In a flood of
compassion, she comforted him, calmed him, then positively
encouraged him to have intercourse with her. However, almost
immediately afterwards, she turned on him again, announced it was
still over, and left.
Over the next few weeks, she settled into her new relationship.
Sexually, they were very active — until she began to feel
sick every morning. Having told her new partner she was infertile, it
was a surprise to both of them to discover she was pregnant. They had
no idea when it had happened until a routine scan told her the baby's
age. Then they calculated that she had conceived the very first week
they had begun to live together.
Her ex-partner refused to leave them in peace, and from time to
time throughout her pregnancy caused great stress. The baby
threatened to miscarry on several occasions, but this time she hung on
to it. In due course she gave birth, albeit slightly prematurely, to a
small but otherwise healthy daughter. Now her ex-partner became
even more demanding, claiming the child to be his. Surrounded by
conflict, the woman lapsed into a deep post-natal depression and
began to neglect and even to mistreat the baby. It might have died had
her new partner not devoted himself to its protection and care, losing
his job in the process. The woman returned to work, leaving her new
partner to take the major role in raising the child.
Her ex-partner faded from their lives for a while. The woman
emerged from her depression, her new partner found employment
again, and they were able to afford child care. Then, just as her life
was settling into a comfortable routine for the first time in years, her
ex-partner reappeared. Now with a good job and rejuvenated
physically, mentally and financially, he wanted to press his claim for
the baby he insisted was his daughter. He paid for a paternity test. The
new partner cooperated, confident that the results would end the
argument once and for all. They did, but not in the way he had hoped.
He was devastated. The baby girl he had cared for so much was not in
fact his daughter.
Within weeks of the result, the woman left to share her old
partner's new and much improved lifestyle, taking her daughter with
her. From then on, the woman's fortunes went from strength to
strength and within three years of their reunion she and her original
partner had two more children.
112 113SPERM WARS SUCCESSFUL FAILURE
n Scene 15, we met a woman who enhanced her reproductive
success by conceiving when, consciously, the last thing she
wanted was another child. In this scene we meet the converse — a
woman who enhances her reproductive success by failing to conceive
when consciously she really wants to.
Most people think of family planning and contraception as modern
inventions. They are not. Even 'deliberate' contraception is not that
new. For centuries, women in various cultures have been placing
leaves or fruit (even crocodile dung!) in their vaginas in an attempt to
avoid conception. Chemical contraception, as in the pill, isn't even a
human invention. Female chimpanzees, for example, at appropriate
times chew leaves that contain contraceptive chemicals. In fact, the
female body was planning families and avoiding conception for tens
of millions of years before humans had even evolved. Women simply
inherited these natural traits from their mammalian ancestors.
For women and all other mammals, the natural mediator between
bad conditions and the avoidance of reproduction is stress. The stress
reaction usually seems like an enemy — a pathological condition that
we cannot shake off and that prevents us from functioning efficiently
and normally. But there is another interpretation: that the stress
reaction is a friend — a means by which the body prevents itself from
doing anything disadvantageous when times are bad. In particular,
stress is a powerful contraceptive. And, to a woman, the avoidance of
conception is an invaluable ally in her pursuit of reproductive
success! How can this be?
The key paradox is that a woman does not necessarily achieve
greatest reproductive success simply by having as many children as
possible as quickly as possible. The very fact that women, like most
primates, usually have only one child at a time is testimony to the
dangers and difficulties of trying to raise more than one child
simultaneously. Twins might seem a good way of increasing
reproductive success, but there is more than twice the danger that both
will die. Unless the woman's circumstances are very favourable, she is
less likely to raise two healthy, fertile children by conceiving twins
than she is by conceiving two children a few years apart.
Women inherited a basic problem from their primate ancestors —
it is very difficult to carry more than one child at a time when walking
long distances. This difficulty is particularly great when walking
upright on two legs, and has plagued women throughout human
evolution — it is not totally unfamiliar even to those living in modern
industrial societies. Of course, the limitation was, and still is,
particularly crucial in those cultures in which women are responsible
for collecting and carrying large quantities of food, water, firewood,
or other materials. Carrying even one child as well is difficult. Under
such circumstances, the greatest reproductive success is achieved by
those who avoid having another child until the previous one can not
only walk but can keep up.
The time interval between successive children is not the only
aspect of 'family planning' that influences a woman's reproductive
success. Children are most likely to survive and grow into healthy,
fertile adults if they are born into a favourable environment. Plenty of
space and an adequate supply of healthy, nutritious food are
paramount. Children then have the lowest risk of contracting diseases
and the greatest resistance to those they do get. In modern societies,
space and nutrition depend on wealth. Even now, the chances of a
child from a poor family dying before reproducing are double those of
a child from a rich family. In the historical and evolutionary past —
when wealth will have been measured not in terms of money but in
terms of crops and livestock, or even simply in terms of access to the
best areas for food, water and shelter — these differences will have
been even greater.
There is a general principle, considered briefly in Scene 8 in
connection with the benefits and dangers of a 'one-child' family:
namely, that for any given woman in any particular situation there
114 115
ISPERM WARS SUCCESSFUL FAILURE
will be a size of family which will give her the greatest number of
grandchildren. If she has a smaller family than this, she will naturally
have fewer grandchildren. Equally, if she tries to have a larger
family, she risks an overcrowded household and spreading herself
and her resources too thinly. The resulting disease and infertility
again mean that she ends up with fewer grandchildren. The challenge
that faces every woman is first to identify the optimum family size
for her circumstances, then to ensure that she has that number of
children. Another factor that influences the number of grandchildren
a woman may have is how she times her conceptions. Life is a
mosaic of situations. Health, wealth and circumstance vary with time,
and some periods in a woman's life are better for having children
than others. Those who time their conceptions to coincide with the
good times will produce the most grandchildren.
It is not just the children who may suffer from being conceived
when times are bad — the mother may suffer also. An untimely
conception may damage her health and situation so much that she
may never again be able to conceive. If the woman in Scene 16 had
produced a child during any of the most stressful phases in her
relationships, she could have suffered irrevocable damage (the
demands of a child when a couple can scarcely maintain themselves
may even be fatal). Under such strained circumstances, there is an
increased risk of ill-health and subsequent infertility. Hostility also
increases, making physical abuse or even murder more likely. The
woman in the scene, by delaying her first child until circumstances
improved, managed, eventually, to have three children for whom she
had the space, time and resources. In the end, she also had the
support of an able partner. Had she tried to reproduce earlier, she
might not only have failed but might also have forfeited her chances
of conceiving in the future.
The best method of avoiding conception is, of course, sexual
abstinence, and the woman and her partner did indeed have spells
without sex in their most stressful days. This happened not because
they consciously wanted to avoid conception — on
the contrary — but because they lost interest in each other. At times,
they even felt hostile. Their bodies were manipulating their emotions
to reduce the chances of conception. Rarely, however, did they give
up routine sex for long. This is because abstinence is in general
disadvantageous as an overall contraception strategy — for the
following reasons.
As we discussed in Scene 2, the primary function of routine sex is
not conception: it is for the woman to confuse the man — and it is for
the man to protect himself against his partner's infidelity by
maintaining a sperm army inside her. Since neither partner can afford
to give up routine sex for too long, both men and women have
mechanisms other than abstinence which, despite continued sexual
activity, reduce the chances of conception when the situation is
unfavourable.
Women in particular have a wide range of such mechanisms. One
of these is widely known: the influence of lactation on ovulation. If a
woman breast-feeds her baby for a few months after giving birth, she
is unlikely to ovulate during that time. This is the case even if she
resumes her periods. Absence of ovulation is one of the main ways in
which a mother spaces the conception of successive children.
However, most of the ways in which she avoids reproducing at
inappropriate times involve stress. In Scene 16, not only did the
woman avoid conception during her most stressful phases, she also
miscarried, then later threatened the life of her new-born baby, in
response to stress.
The stress reaction manifests itself in many ways. In the scene,
faced with a difficult relationship during adolescence, the woman
lapsed into anorexia, as do 1 per cent of girls between sixteen and
eighteen years of age. The physiological stress caused by such nearstarvation is contraceptive — ovulation, and often menstruation, are
inhibited. Usually the situation is temporary. Although a few
anorexics (5-10 per cent) die as a result of their behaviour and a few
more (15-20 per cent) continue to be anorexic throughout their lives,
the majority (75 per
116 117SPERM WARS SUCCESSFUL FAILURE
cent) emerge from the condition to live a normal, healthy and
eventually reproductive life.
Most contraceptive reactions are less extreme than anorexia. Even
so, the more a woman is stressed the less likely she is to ovulate
(Scene 15). She is also less likely to help sperm reach the egg or to
allow a fertilised egg to implant in her womb. Finally, she is more
likely to miscarry, particularly during the first three months of
pregnancy.
It is estimated that, whereas most fertilised eggs survive to reach
the womb, on average about 40 per cent fail to implant and, of the
remainder, about 60 per cent die before the twelfth day of pregnancy.
Even then, about 20 per cent are miscarried during the next three
months. All of these figures are higher if a woman is stressed, lower
if she is not. The death of a partner, a partner's infidelity, or the
outbreak of war, for example, are all known to increase the chances
of miscarriage. During the first few months, miscarriage is also more
likely if there is anything wrong with the baby, either genetically or
developmentally.
At first, it might seem odd that a woman has so many different
ways of avoiding having a child. Certainly, if any one of these
systems were efficient, there would seem no need for others. But this
apparent excess of responses is not an error in female programming.
Circumstances change, often quickly, and a woman's body needs to
respond equally quickly. For example, circumstances may be
favourable when she ovulates but no longer so by the time the egg
reaches her womb. So she will ovulate, but then avoid implantation.
Or circumstances may be favourable at the time of implantation but
may become unfavourable a month or so later. So, having become
pregnant, she miscarries.
Even if circumstances remain favourable throughout early
pregnancy, they may yet deteriorate before the baby is born. The last
three months of pregnancy are often associated with marked changes
in a woman's psychology. First, there are the well known spells of
'nest-building' — strong urges to prepare the environment into which
the baby will be born. Also there are spells of
intense reappraisal — primary targets are her partner, home and
general environment. These spells often manifest themselves as
phases of worry, depression and irritability. Finally, there is often a
preoccupation with the future. Any major deterioration in a woman's
circumstances at this time can lead to pathological depression and the
later rejection, or even abuse, of the baby.
Post-natal depression as an irresistible urge to abandon, abuse or
even kill a new baby is widely recognised. So widely, in fact, that
many legal systems around the world accept that a woman may not
be responsible for her actions in the phase immediately after giving
birth.
Throughout human history infanticide has been, and still is, one of
the major forms of family planning employed by women. In huntergatherers, people who live by hunting and foraging rather than by
cultivation, about 7 per cent of children are killed by their mother.
According to the World Health Organisation, infanticide was the
most prevalent form of family planning in late-nineteenth-century
Britain.
Such behaviour is not restricted to humans. Like all the other
forms of natural family planning, we inherited infanticide from our
mammalian ancestors. Anybody who has kept pets such as rabbits,
gerbils, hamsters or mice will know that if the mother is at all stressed
soon after giving birth, she is likely to kill, even eat, some or all of
her litter. Such infanticide is not pathological: it reflects the mother's
subconscious decision not to raise the litter in the current
circumstances. She opts instead to delay her attempt until
circumstances improve.
So far, we have concentrated on family planning from the woman's
viewpoint. But men, too, have many of the same problems. They
direct a large part of their reproductive effort into preparing an
environment for their children. During hard times, a man should want
to avoid raising children just as much as his partner.
Most of the time, a couple's interests coincide. The woman's body
will plan their family to their mutual benefit. But there are times
when their interests do not coincide. Then, a man needs
118 119SPERM WARS SUCCESSFUL FAILURE
a contraceptive mechanism of his own. Interests are most likely to
conflict when the couple's circumstances are almost, but not quite,
good enough to have a child. In this situation, if the woman meets
someone her body deems to be genetically superior to her partner, she
may be tempted into trying to have a child with another man. In such
circumstances, discussed further in Scene 18, the reproductive benefit
to the woman of a child with this other man would be worth the risk
of overstretching her and her partner's resources. Obviously, her
partner would gain no such benefit.
For him, this is a dangerous and delicate turn of events. Somehow,
he has to prevent the situation just described from happening. At the
same time, he has to avoid impregnating his partner himself. Without
knowing it, the man in Scene 16, the woman's original partner, was in
this situation in the weeks before her desertion. The only option for
such a man is to use routine sex to prevent his partner from
conceiving to anybody, himself included. And men have a very
sophisticated mechanism by which they can do just that: they wage
war on their own sperm.
There are two types of sperm in a man's ejaculate which strongly
reduce the chances of conception if they are present in large numbers.
It seems that these sperm might actually be programmed to destroy a
man's own egg-getters. One of them has a cigar-shaped head and is
called a tapering sperm. The other has a pear-shaped head and is
called a pyriform sperm. Just as for women, stress is contraceptive.
When men are stressed, they produce much greater numbers of these
so-called family-planning sperm.
The more family-planning sperm and the fewer egg-getters a man
introduces into his partner, the lower the chances that she will
conceive. But if she is unfaithful and sperm warfare occurs, her
partner's family-planning sperm can help his conventional killers
overcome the other man's egg-getters. Furthermore if, despite the
partner's efforts, an egg-getter does get through, there is at least a
chance that the child will be his. Had he
responded to stress by abstaining from routine sex, there would be no
such chance.
In Scene 16 this strategy worked successfully for the woman's first
partner. He managed to prevent her becoming pregnant throughout
her weeks of infidelity. But when, eventually, she conceived, he was
the victor in the sperm war she had promoted.
As we have now seen, the bodies of both men and women have a
range of natural methods, mainly triggered by stress, by which they
avoid having children when times are bad. We might expect,
therefore, that societies living in generally more stressful situations
would have fewer children. But they do not — in fact, exactly the
opposite is true. How is this possible?
The explanation is that the factors that influence the best number of
children to have are different from the factors that influence the best
time to have those children. Historically and geographically, the
number of times a woman gives birth in her lifetime is linked closely
to the chances of her children surviving to adulthood. When survival
prospects are poor, a woman gives birth to many children. If she does
not, few or none may survive to adulthood. She avoids having
children during only the very worst times, and conceives whenever
circumstances show signs of improving. In contrast, as we saw
earlier, when survival prospects are good a woman gives birth to
fewer children and lavishes much more of her time and resources on
each. Her effort is less likely to be wasted because each child's chance
of survival is high. Again, she avoids having children during bad
times and only conceives when circumstances are really favourable.
In all of these situations, stress is the contraceptive. But because
women in different circumstances have different expectations, they
are stressed by different levels of deprivation. Circumstances which
would stress a woman in the suburbs of Western Europe or North
America would not stress a woman living in a drainpipe in the Third
World. It is a woman's expectation of living standard that determines
the number of children she attempts to have. Whatever her
expectation, as circumstances fluctuate and her expectations are
exceeded or disappointed,
120 121SPERM WARS SUCCESSFUL FAILURE
stress comes and goes. As it does so, it influences just when she has
each child as she strives to reach her preferred total.
Small families are not a new invention. For most of human history,
from about one million years ago until as recently as ten to fifteen
thousand years ago, all people lived as hunter-gatherers. Men hunted
animals and women foraged for fruit and vegetables. Societies were
made up of small, scattered bands of people. They had a good,
protein-rich diet and most deaths were due to accident, predation and
inter-group warfare rather than disease. The children of huntergatherers had an excellent chance of survival. Using nothing but the
natural, stress-related methods we have discussed, women gave birth
to only three or four children in their lifetime. Of these, two or three
survived.
Large families did not appear until about ten thousand years or so
ago, when agriculture brought a change of lifestyle. In the most
fertile areas, large and concentrated communities developed, living
on a carbohydrate-rich diet. Disease and infant mortality were rife.
The average number of children was about seven or eight, but double
figures were commonplace. Even so, whole families could be wiped
out in days by virulent disease. As with the hunter-gatherers, on
average, only two or three in each survived.
With the advent of 'modernisation', the infant mortality rate began
to fall and so, too, a few decades later, did the birth rate. In Western
Europe this decline in birth rate was again the product of natural
family planning, for it preceded by up to a century the availability
and use of modern contraception. So this reduction in family size to
the levels found in modern industrial societies was due not to
improved contraception technology, but to women subconsciously
planning smaller families in response to the improved survival
prospects of their children.
Many women will read this discussion of natural family planning
with some cynicism, wondering how, if their bodies are so wonderful
at family planning, they managed to conceive at precisely the time
they least wanted. This is yet another
example of the conflict between the conscious brain and the
subconscious body.
As we have repeatedly seen, a woman's body may interpret its
circumstances very differently from her brain. We encountered this
conflict in Scene 15, in which the woman thought the last thing she
wanted in the middle of wartime was to conceive. Nevertheless, her
body actually went out of its way to become pregnant. In that
instance, the body was proved right and the woman achieved most of
her reproductive success through the son 'mistakenly' conceived on
that occasion.
It would, of course, be wrong to conclude that the body is always
right. No body is programmed to respond perfectly to every situation.
The very fact that in every generation some people achieve a greater
reproductive success than others indicates that some bodies make
more mistakes than others. Quite possibly, though, bodies make fewer
mistakes than brains. Yet recently, brains have been given greater
power in this question of contraception. Modern contraceptives, such
as the pill and the cap, at first sight would seem to take the control of
conception away from the body and hand it much more firmly to the
brain. But this change in control may not, as we have seen, influence
the total number of children a woman may have. Rather, modern
contraceptive methods supplement a woman's natural mechanisms by
helping her to control when she has her children — and with whom,
as we shall see in the next scene.
122 123SPERM WARS SUCCESSFUL FAILURE
SCENE 17
How Forgetful
As the taxi pulled up, the woman heard her partner opening the front
door. She listened as he came back into the house and picked up his
bags. Holding her breath, she waited to see if he would come back
into the room to say goodbye. But the front door closed, more loudly
than usual, and he walked to the taxi without looking back. He would
be gone for four weeks, and they were parting on bad terms.
They had been arguing on and off for a year now, and nearly
always about the same thing. He wanted another child — preferably a
son — but she didn't. She had been under pressure to come off the pill
ever since the younger of their two daughters had started school. Now
in her early thirties, the woman wanted to return to her career. Over
the past few months, her partner had become increasingly
disillusioned with his job and recently he had been ill. His
disillusionment seemed to have stripped him of his health and energy
and he had been off work for six weeks, returning only a month ago.
Those six weeks had been a nightmare. She knew that what he
really needed to speed his recovery was peace and quiet but, in spite
of herself, she just could not oblige. It irritated her, having him under
her feet all day while she ferried the children to and from school, did
the shopping and maintained the house. He had insisted on sitting
around downstairs instead of keeping out of her way in bed. Try as
she might, she could not avoid showing her irritation, and arguments
were frequent. They had even argued over the new window-cleaner.
He was a young man, earning money over the summer to help finance
his place on some tropical expedition. Good-looking, confident
and flirtatious, he had once commented on the bikini she was wearing
in the garden. Her partner had overheard and accused her of making a
pass at the young man.
Despite his return to work, their relationship had failed to improve.
Early in the month she had vomited on and off for two days, and had
been so worried in case she had lost the contraceptive protection of
her pill that she had insisted on him using a condom. He had sulked
all month. Then, last night, he had wanted unprotected sex — a
gesture from her to him to see him through his four weeks away from
her. She had refused, and they hadn't spoken since. Now he was gone,
bad feeling unresolved. The day after he left, two things happened.
She finished her current month's supply of the pill and she received
an apologetic long-distance phone call from her partner. They made
up over the phone as best they could. Then, over the next few days,
they returned to their normal long-distance relationship, exchanging
platitudes of concern and affection.
It happened just a week into his trip. It was mid-morning and she
had just returned home from taking their two daughters to school and
doing the shopping. Just as she had finished showering and drying her
hair, the door-bell rang. She pulled on her bath robe and went to the
door, to be confronted by her partner's immediate superior from work.
He had called round to see if she had heard from her partner recently
— because he hadn't. He had tried to phone her but had got no reply
and, because there was an urgent message about a change of itinerary,
he had decided to call round. She invited him in and, after they had
discussed the reason for his call, politely offered him a coffee.
They had met socially a few times before. Once, much to the
irritation of their respective partners, they had indulged in a flirtatious
conversation at a drunken New Year's party. He reminded her of that
night, and they laughed. Gradually, their conversation turned to the
problems they were each having with their respective partners. She
didn't notice what triggered her first flutter of sexual excitement as
she busied herself with
124 125SPERM WARS SUCCESSFUL FAILURE
percolator and cups in the kitchen. All she knew was that at some
point she became aware that only her hastily tied bath robe separated
her body from his eyes and that he was watching her intently, waiting
for glimpses of her nakedness. As the excitement took hold of her,
she found excuses to touch his arms and back as she moved around in
the kitchen. She laughed exaggeratedly at his comments and
contrived reasons for bending and twisting in front of him, pretending
not to notice as her robe loosened and the bulge in his trousers grew.
When the drinks were ready, they went into the sitting-room. She
sat opposite him, breasts scarcely covered. Conversation became
strained as they each waited for a sign that they would not be
rebuffed. In a final move, she lifted her legs on to the chair, deftly
pushing her bath robe between her legs to cover herself. Then, over
the next few minutes, she watched his eyes flick backwards and
forwards between her face and her genitals as she allowed her bath
robe slowly to slip away, giving him an open display of her vulva.
Minutes later they were having intercourse on the floor and ten
minutes after that he had gone, suddenly embarrassed by what had just
happened but telling her that her body had been irresistible.
This event began a week that in later life would seem to her like a
scene from a film — a very bad film. Surely it couldn't have been her
doing all of those things — acting out such clichéd events. At the
time, though, she had simply seemed driven by some powerful force
deep inside her. As the week progressed, she was to have many
moments of fear — fear that somehow her partner would find out
what she had done and fear that she had caught something. When,
two days after this first infidelity, she realised she had forgotten to
start her new pack of pills on time, she also feared that she might be
pregnant. But for most of the week that had just begun, she was simply
to feel a height of sexual restlessness and excitement that she hadn't
experienced in years — and would never experience again.
Only an hour after her infidelity, she masturbated. She masturbated
again the next morning. That afternoon, while
sunbathing in the back garden, she heard the young window-cleaner
arrive at the front. She was inside the house and up to her bedroom in
seconds, standing in front of her bedroom mirror, back to the window.
When she saw the reflection of the young man's face appear at the
window, she slowly took off her bikini, then turned to face him.
Feigning surprise at seeing him she waved unconcernedly, then busied
herself with tidying the room, deliberately choosing jobs that involved
much stretching and bending. When he rang the door-bell for his
money, she opened the door naked, 'hiding' her body behind the
frosted-glass door panel. She complained of the heat and, looking
down at her nakedness, laughed that she had no money on her.
Inviting him in while she went to fetch some, she joked that he could
have sex with her instead if he liked.
No more windows were cleaned on her road that afternoon until,
after her best climax during intercourse for years, she left to pick up
the children from school.
She didn't masturbate again that week, but she had sex twice more
with her partner's boss and once more with the young windowcleaner. That weekend, which she spent with her two daughters, it
was as if she suddenly woke up from a dream. The excitement of the
week disappeared, to be replaced by sheer disbelief at what she had
done. On the Monday, she told both lovers that it had been fun but a
mistake, and she was no longer available. The older man was
relieved, the younger man disappointed.
When her partner returned, two weeks later, she told him about
forgetting to start her pills on time but let him have unprotected sex
anyway as a coming-home present. After that, in the days they were
waiting for her period to start, she insisted he wore a condom.
She never did have her period. Three weeks after her partner's return,
a pregnancy test confirmed that she was pregnant. Her partner was
thrilled, even when the child turned out to be another girl. And he
never did find out about his boss and the window-cleaner.
126 127SPERM WARS SUCCESSFUL FAILURE
ost readers will recognise the seduction of the young
window-cleaner as a cliché (as, later, did the main character
in Scene 17 herself). It, or something similar, has been used as a not
very imaginative 'dramatic device' in a multitude of films, plays and
books. If the man involved is not a window-cleaner, he is an
electrician, a plumber, a builder, a TV repair man or (in Britain, the
biggest cliché of all) a milkman. In short, he is any man who has a
legitimate reason for visiting a woman in her home while her partner
is absent.
Indeed, so hackneyed is this scenario that there is a danger, if we
are not careful, of missing the important point: namely, that the
behaviour has become hackneyed precisely because it is so common.
As such, it plays an important role in the promotion of sperm warfare
— and hence in the paternity of children conceived via such warfare.
Why should the woman in the scene, and so many like her, suddenly
throw herself at two male visitors to her home? What is the
significance of the saga of her contraceptive pills? And how did she
benefit from her behaviour in terms of reproductive success?
When this scene began, the woman genuinely believed that she
didn't want another child. In order to prevent conception, she was
taking the pill and, when necessary, making doubly sure by forcing
her partner to use a condom. Then, in the midst of what, sexually,
was the most active week of her life, she 'forgot' to take contraceptive
precautions. Was this lapse of memory really a mistake, or was it a
subconscious strategy? And was it yet another example of a 'failure'
destined actually to increase a woman's reproductive success? What
this woman's body had really decided was that it didn't want another
child by her partner. Her brain was then simply coerced into finding a
convincing reason why they, as a couple, should avoid conception.
That reason was so convincing, she even managed to persuade herself
that she wanted to go back to work.
In her eyes, her partner had decreased in stature over the years. He
had failed to live up to the potential he had shown when she
committed her first two children to his genes. Now his health also was
failing, and he was proving less than robust. As far as she was
concerned, he had no saving graces in terms of intellect or character,
either. In effect, her body had decided that a third child should be
fathered by somebody with signs of a more robust genetic constitution
than him. So when the opportunity presented itself, her body made
sure that she took full advantage.
A woman is less likely to use contraception when she has sex with
somebody other than her partner. And it is not always because the
circumstances surrounding the infidelity make the use of
contraception difficult. The first time the woman in Scene 17 had sex
with her partner's boss or with the window-cleaner, it would have
been difficult to insist on their wearing a condom. But on subsequent
occasions she, and they, could have been better prepared — but they
weren't. In any case, she wasn't dependent on these men and on
condoms. Had she taken her pill at the appropriate time, she could still
have avoided conception. But she forgot. Was it really an accident, a
genuine lapse of memory? Or did her body subconsciously manipulate
her into forgetting, so that she conceived to a man other than her
partner?
The sudden but week-long surge of sexual excitement the woman
experienced was the outward manifestation of hormones produced
during her fertile period. We have already discussed (Scene 6) how
women become more interested in infidelity at this time. Her sudden
loss of sexual interest at the end of her week of infidelity marked the
end of her fertile period and, as it happened, the beginning of her
pregnancy. By the time her partner returned and accepted an
unprotected intercourse as a coming-home present, the woman will
already have been two weeks pregnant.
Women, like most female animals that hide the fertile phase of
their menstrual cycle, continue to have intercourse well into
pregnancy. This is the final touch by which they can confuse the
128 129
MSPERM WARS SUCCESSFUL FAILURE
males around them. If a woman lost interest in sex as soon as she
conceived, it would be a clear signal to the males around her that
conception had occurred. This would allow each of them to make
some assessment of who could and could not be the genetic father.
Continuing intercourse well into pregnancy guarantees the ultimate
confusion of all potential fathers. This explains why our main
character was keen to have unprotected intercourse with her partner
on his return. It meant that in his eyes, and even in hers, he could have
been the father of her third child, even though he wasn't.
Given such a short-lived and ideal opportunity for undetected
infidelity, the woman's body made a shrewd move in collecting sperm
from more than one man. She gained two benefits. First, she halved
her chances of being unlucky enough to collect sperm from a man
who just happened to be infertile (10 per cent of men, largely due to
sexually transmitted disease — Scene 11), despite appearing to be a
suitable genetic father (Scene 18). But secondly, by putting two men's
armies into competition, she increased her chances of being fertilised
by an ejaculate competent at sperm warfare (Scenes 6 and 21). She
might never again have such a perfect opportunity to conceive a child
with better genes than her partner could provide — not without
leaving him, anyway. We do not know which of the two competitors
was actually the father, but whichever he was, he was the man who
won the sperm war she had promoted.
When a woman has sex with two men over a short period of time,
she has three ways of influencing which of them fathers any child that
may result. First, she can have sex with one of the men at a more
fertile phase of her menstrual cycle (Scene 6). Secondly, she can
retain a larger sperm army from one of the males (Scenes 22 to 26).
Thirdly, like the woman in Scene 17, she can use modern
contraceptive techniques.
If a woman uses a barrier method, such as cap or condom, with one
man but not the other, she can prevent the former from entering sperm
into warfare at all. Alternatively, by using the pill and then not using
the pill, like the woman in the scene,
she can influence which man's sperm is most likely to have access to
an egg. Indeed, our main character made full use of modern
contraception in ensuring that she did not conceive via her partner.
The other two men, however, were given equal chances. All they had
to do was win a sperm war.
As we discussed in Scene 16, modern contraception may not have
much influence on how many children a woman has in her lifetime.
But it has provided her with a powerful and efficient tool with which
to enhance her natural ability to time when and via whom she
conceives. Rarely is contraception technology used in this way
consciously. But in the hands of a woman's urges it is a powerful new
weapon by which she can increase her reproductive success.
130 131CHAPTER SEVEN
Shopping Around
for Genes
Scene 18
Spoilt for Choice
Despite the open windows, the room was hot and humid. The naked
woman moved slowly off the bed so as not to wake the young man
sprawled next to her. Without dressing, she walked downstairs,
through the open french windows, and into the bright sunlight. The
tiles of the patio were hot to her feet. She paused for a second, then
ran a few steps and dived into the large swimming pool. The blissfully
cool water washed the remnants of her recent intercourse from her
thighs and pubic hair and, as she swam the length of the pool, carried
away her flowback.
She had been in the water about ten minutes when the young man
she had left on her bed appeared on the patio. She watched his naked,
tanned and muscular body run across the hot tiles and dive not quite
perfectly into the water. He swam strongly over to her, trod water by
her side, then kissed her. After a few minutes together, enjoying the
water, she asked him to go. Without argument, he swam back across
the pool, pulled himself out of the water, and disappeared into the
house to shower and dress.
The woman also left the pool. She dried herself with a towel
hanging from the pool-side lounger, then walked down the steps on to
the lawn, relishing the coolness of the grass beneath her
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
feet. There was no danger of her nakedness being seen. The garden
was so large, the bordering trees and security fencing so high and the
neighbours so far away, that her privacy was complete. When the
young man appeared at the french windows to shout his farewell, she
was on her way back to the patio. She felt like a Greek statue as she
stood in the middle of the lawn and waved goodbye. For a woman only
months from her fortieth birthday and with three children, one now in
her mid-twenties, her body was in impressive shape.
As the young man turned to leave, she walked back to the patio. In
five years, he was probably her best find yet. Her advertisement was
simple but effective: 'Part-time gardener required to maintain large
garden over summer. Ideal for student during summer vacation'. Each
year she had interviewed over twenty applicants. Her choice was
based on the student's looks, intelligence, maturity, self-confidence
and sexual aura. She took it as testimony to her own good looks and
judgment that it had never taken her more than a fortnight to seduce
any of her choices. The result was that for two days a week, over
about three months each summer, she had the sexual companionship
of a young man nearly twenty years her junior. And she had her lawn
mowed and her garden weeded.
This year she had hired two men, both medical students, whom she
had found equally attractive. One worked on Tuesdays, the other
Fridays. As she stretched out in the sun on the lounger, she toyed once
again with the fantasy of having both young men in bed with her at
the same time. But that was for the future. As she drifted in and out of
a sun-drenched sleep, she reflected on the events that had given her
such a good life.
It all began on her fourteenth birthday. She had been out with her
mother, shopping around for a new pair of jeans. It was a freezing
cold winter's day, and while they were shopping it had started to snow.
The town was a forty-five-minute bus ride away from their home, even
on a good day. By the time they arrived at the bus stop, the snow was
settling fast. The bus never came. But the man in the large and very
expensive car did.
132 133SPERM WARS
He wasn't really a stranger. When he wasn't at his apartment in the
city, he lived in a virtual mansion in their home village. Her father
worked for him as a gardener cum handyman, helping to maintain his
house and its grounds. Although for years she had seen him driving
around, she had never really met him before. All she knew was that
he was about fifty years old, very rich, and apparently had no
children, despite having lived with the same woman for about twenty
years. She had heard her parents talk about infidelity and children by
other women. She had also heard them talk about infertility and
women's problems, but had taken little interest.
On the journey home she had been struck by his friendliness. At
fourteen, she was well developed and already attractive, with a
maturity and self-confidence that would have graced a twenty-yearold. During the journey, she found herself doing most of the talking.
She liked and felt comfortable with this man and had no hesitation, a
week later, in accepting another lift from him when he drove past her
at the school bus stop. After that, he drove her home with increasing
frequency. Her schoolfriends teased her a bit about it, but it didn't
bother her.
The following summer, during the long vacation, she lost her
virginity. Her lover was a boy of seventeen whom she and her friends
had worshipped from a distance for months. After the trauma of their
first intercourse, she began to enjoy their sexual activities. She
became the envy of her friends as she described in great, though
sometimes imaginary, detail her sexual adventures with this young
idol.
That autumn, she resumed her journeys home from school with her
father's employer. She was in his car the day before his partner was
diagnosed as having terminal cancer. After that, she didn't see him for
several months as he and his partner moved to the city for her to be
treated. He did not reappear until a few weeks after his partner's death
which, she discovered later, had been the day after her fifteenth
birthday. From then on, whenever he wasn't in the city on business,
he made a point of picking her up from school. Soon, they
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
actually discussed which days he could do so, and she would wait for
him.
Winter cut down on the sexual activity with her boyfriend until he
passed his driving test and acquired a virtually derelict car. Then, they
became adept at cramped sex on the cold and badly sprung back seat.
She began to fantasise about doing the same with her father's employer
in the luxury of his car. It would be like being in bed. Now, stretched
out in the sun by the side of her swimming pool, the woman still
remembered clearly the move that changed her life. On their way
home from school, waiting at traffic lights, she had put her hand on
his thigh and leaned across to kiss him on the cheek.
They never did have sex in his car. But within a week of that kiss
she was in his bed, experiencing for the first time the difference
between sex with a man of fifty and sex with a boy of seventeen.
Throughout that spring and summer she had sex at least twice a week,
more or less alternately with her boyfriend and the older man. Neither
knew of the other's existence. It was autumn before she and her mother
realised she was three months pregnant.
She refused to discuss paternity with anyone except her parents and
her father's employer. Her parents were told that the father was the
young boyfriend who had just left for college and whose parents had
now moved out of the area. Her father's employer was told that the
baby was his, as well it might have been. He feared conviction for
having sex with a fifteen-year-old girl. But he also felt genuine affection
for her and for the child he believed was his. Explaining to her parents
that he would do the same for any employee who was in trouble, he
offered to help with the child's upkeep. On the strength of this extra
income, her parents volunteered to look after the child, a girl, while
their daughter finished her education.
When, despite the distractions of motherhood, she performed well
in her examinations, the man again offered to help. This time he
provided money for her to have a college education. During her two
and a bit years at college, she had about ten
134 135SPERM WARS
different sexual partners. Even so, twice a term she would arrange to
meet her benefactor at his city apartment for a weekend of sex and a
taste of the high life.
She never did graduate. In her third year, faced with a choice
between months of hard revision and a tempting offer from her
benefactor, she left college. They travelled extensively for a few
months and then, on their return, began to live together with the
daughter, now aged six. At her urging, he sold his mansion and
bought the wonderful house in which she now lived. They spent nearly
ten years together in comfort and luxury, travelling the world, and
mixing with equally wealthy people. They also had a further two
children, both boys.
All three of the woman's children were raised by nannies, sent to
boarding school, and spent very little time at home. Her partner was
without doubt the father of her elder son, but she could not be sure
who was the father of the younger one. It could have been her partner,
but it could equally have been the politician with whom she had sex
every day for a week at about the relevant time. Moreover, if he had
been a month later taking her to bed, so too might have been the
surgeon, a family friend who had treated her predecessor for cancer.
Her partner lived just long enough to see the younger son's eighth
birthday. Then, aged sixty-five, he died of a heart attack. That was ten
years ago. She inherited the house and more than enough money to
live very comfortably — she continued to pay for her children's
education, travelled when she wanted and indulged in occasional
luxuries, like young gardeners. After her partner's death, there had
been no shortage of men eager to share her life. Many were widowed
or separated and most were rich. She was rarely without a sexual
partner, and often successive partners overlapped. However, she
stubbornly refused to allow anybody to live with her permanently.
Besides, she was increasingly attracted to struggling young men, full
of drive and ambition, rather than to men saddled with the
complacency of success or inheritance.
Her daughter, now aged twenty-five and living abroad with
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
her partner, had just announced her first pregnancy. Her sons, aged
eighteen and nineteen, were both at college studying medicine. She
took great pride in all her children, particularly her sons — not
because of what she had done for them, which in truth was very little,
but for what they were and for what they had done for themselves. The
boys were very different from each other, perhaps reflecting a
different paternity. But they were both good-looking and intelligent,
precociously mature and confident, yet still gentle and caring. She had
no doubt they were going to break many a girl's heart.
Earlier, in their mid-teens, they had been in the habit of bringing
home friends from school to stay for a while during the vacations.
Many a young boy had been shocked and embarrassed at the family's
practice of swimming naked together in the pool. In two weeks' time,
her sons would begin their summer vacation. This time they would stay
with her for only a week before travelling abroad, and, moreover, they
were bringing girls with them, not boys. Mischievously, the woman
wondered if they would swim naked with her this summer — and, if
they did, whether their girlfriends would join them.
She got up off the lounger and sauntered across the patio, dragging
her towel behind her. It was time to shower and dress so as to be ready
for her evening's escort. As she made her way indoors, she enjoyed yet
again the thought that for a gardener's daughter she had done rather
well.
n congratulating herself on her life, the woman in this scene was of
course measuring her success on a hedonistic scale. By her own
and probably most other people's yardsticks, she had indeed done
'rather well'. And even on a biological scale, she had done rather well.
Few factors have more influence on a person's reproductive success
than their selection of a mate or mates. Yet mate selection is complex,
particularly for a woman. More often than not she has to compromise
in many different ways. The scene we
136 137
ISPERM WARS
have just witnessed is the first of four in which we shall explore two
matters — the problems that people, particularly women, face when
selecting a mate; and the methods they employ in solving those
problems.
Here the central character successfully cleared all of the obstacles
to reproductive success that women normally encounter when
choosing a mate. First, through her choice of long-term partner, she
engineered an environment conducive to the easy and successful
raising of children (from the point of view of being in a position to
offer them every opportunity, anyway). Secondly, she managed to
collect some of the most sought-after male genes in her vicinity. As
a result, she produced children with the looks and ability to make the
most of the comfortable environment into which they were born. Her
strategy was risky, but innate ability was on her side. She made the
most of her daring and cunning, her composure and good looks, and
successfully walked the tightrope of disease, discovery and
desertion.
In choosing a man or men with whom to share her life, a woman
has two major issues to consider. On the one hand, she needs a man
who can help her raise her children. On the other, she needs genes
that in combination with her own will produce attractive, fertile and
successful children. The better the environment and the better the
assistance, the more fully each child will achieve his or her genetic
potential.
A woman's difficulty is that she has a much wider choice of men
to provide her with genes than she has of long-term partners. She
could probably persuade many men of her choice to give her their
genes — it takes only a few minutes of sex, after all. Her options for
a long-term partner, though, are much more limited. Most men in
most societies have not the time, the energy nor the resources to help
support more than one woman and her children at any one time. Her
choice of long-term partner is therefore restricted to those men who
are unattached, ready to desert their current partner, or who have so
much time, energy or wealth that they can support more than one
family.
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
An equally difficult problem is to identify which of the few
available men would make the best long-term partner. The most
reliable way would be to look at past performance, but inevitably the
best long-term partners are already paired to other women. Much of
the woman's choice, therefore, is limited to young and unattached
men who have not yet proved themselves as long-term partners. All
she can do is look for signs of potential, and hope that her judgment
is accurate.
Surveys of many cultures around the world consistently show that,
in looking for a long-term partner, women prefer men who have, or
have the potential of, wealth, status, stability and durability. In the
past, in all cultures, the children of women paired to men at the top of
the scale for these qualities had a far greater chance of survival,
health and subsequent fecundity. The same holds true even in today's
industrialised societies.
The preferences are clear, but for most women a level of
compromise is necessary. One man may be wealthy but uncaring;
another may be of high status but unstable; yet another may be poor,
but stable and caring. So, inevitably, a woman has to opt for the best
compromise. Of course, she does not have to stay with her first
partner. Again, studies show that when a woman leaves one partner
for another, she invariably moves up the scale to a better
compromise.
In choosing a man to help raise her children, a woman is only
secondarily impressed by looks, whereas in choosing a short-term
partner for sex, looks are much more important. The features she
finds most attractive are clear eyes, healthy skin and hair, firm
buttocks, a waist that is about the same in circumference as his hips,
shapely legs, broad shoulders, quick wit and intelligence. She is also
attracted by symmetry in his physical features. These various
qualities are all reasonably reliable indicators of genetic health,
fertility and competitiveness. As such, they imply a genetic
constitution that would also be desirable in her children.
Since women are seeking different attributes in short-term and
long-term partners, but have more choice of short-term
138 139SPERM WARS
they may again have to compromise. They have two main options.
They can choose the best available long-term partner, and then rely
on infidelity to obtain the best genes. This can succeed, but only if
they successfully avoid the disadvantages of infidelity that we have
already discussed (Scenes 8 to 11). Alternatively, they can choose a
man who, although neither the best provider of genes nor the best
partner, is at least the best available compromise.
As we have found in so many aspects of reproductive success,
women's behaviour and experience are mirrored by other animals. In
this instance, women are not the only females who have to trade off
between male support and male genes. One of the most revealing
studies of the problem concerns a bird, the blue tit. The females of
this species show all of the behaviour we have just described for
women. Those lucky ones paired to genetically superior males with
the best territories are totally faithful. Neighbouring females, paired
to genetically inferior males, take every opportunity to seek infidelity
with the superior males. They sneak into the better males' territories,
solicit intercourse, then return unobserved to the partner they have
just cheated. On average, about a third of young birds in a nest have
not been sired by their mother's partner. Actual levels range from 0
per cent in the nests of the most favoured males to about 80 per cent
in the nests of the least favoured ones.
A surprisingly similar pattern is found in humans. On average,
about 10 per cent of children are not sired by their supposed father.
Some men, however, have a higher chance of being deceived in this
way than others — and it is those of low wealth and status who fare
worst. Actual figures range from 1 per cent in high-status areas of
Switzerland and the USA, through 5-6 per cent for moderate-status
males in Britain and the USA, to 10-30 per cent for lower-status
males in Britain, France and the USA. Moreover, the men most
likely to sexually hoodwink the lower-status males are men of higher
status. Anthropological studies have shown precisely the same
pattern. Men of higher wealth and status obtain partners earlier,
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
start to reproduce earlier, are less likely to have their partners
impregnated by other men and are more likely to do exactly that to
other males. So in all ways, men of wealth and status have the
potential to be reproductively more successful than their lower-status
contemporaries.
Returning to birds — it is rare, unless the male is infertile, for all
of the young in 'his' nest to have been sired by other males. It is as if
the female always gives her partner some chance of paternity so as to
retain his help in paternal care. The same may be true for humans.
Moreover, when we look at which children are most likely to belong
to their partner, women show a clear pattern. As with the woman in
Scene 18, the child most likely to have been sired by a woman's
partner is the second; the children least likely are the first, and
particularly the last. The reasons, though, are slightly different for
first and last.
Often, a woman is already pregnant when she settles down with a
long-term partner, and occasionally this partner is not the father of
her child. Sometimes he knows this and takes on the woman and her
child anyway (Scene 15), for reasons we have discussed (Scene 9),
but sometimes he doesn't know. The woman is least likely to be
unfaithful in the weeks or months preceding the conception of her
second child. Subsequent children, however, are more and more
likely to be the product of infidelity.
Identifying the best partners and the best providers of genes, then
pursuing the best available compromise, is only one aspect of a
woman's problem in obtaining a mate. Having selected him, she then
has to recruit him into the chosen role. She can do this only if the
man finds her attractive enough. If she cannot attract her first choice,
she then has to compromise yet again. The man she finally recruits
will be the best compromise among those she wants and those she
can attract. The woman in Scene 18 was successful because a rich
and successful man, thirty-five years older than herself, picked her
out from the crowd. Then, without her infidelity being detected, she
set about collecting genes from other successful men. She succeeded
once again because these
140 141SPERM WARS
men considered sex with her to be worth the risk. In short, she
succeeded because she was attractive to men, both as a partner and as
a lover.
So, what was it about this woman that men found so attractive?
What criteria do men use in choosing partners and lovers, and how do
these criteria differ from those used by women?
Basically, men select women for their health, fertility and fidelity
— though not consciously, of course. On seeing a woman, men do not
immediately remark on her potential for bearing and raising children.
Nevertheless, the features that men's bodies are programmed to find
attractive are precisely those that do reflect this potential. Unlike a
woman, a man uses similar criteria whether he is selecting a partner or
a lover — for both, his primary concern is with looks and behaviour.
An important feature is body shape, particularly the ratio of waist to
hip. Irrespective of whether a woman is thin or fat, men prefer
someone whose waist measurement is about 70 per cent of her hip
measurement. This preference is remarkably constant both throughout
history (to judge from statues, paintings and 'girlie' magazines) and
from culture to culture (to judge from rock-paintings and figurines). In
some cultures, men prefer thin women; in others, fat. But in all
cultures, they prefer women with waists significantly narrower than
their buttocks. The explanation is that this shape reflects a good
hormone balance, good resistance to disease and good fertility.
In addition to shape, men all over the world also respond strongly
to clear eyes, healthy hair and skin, and the shape of the face,
particularly its symmetry. Again, these features are strong indicators
of health and hence fertility. Men of most cultures also respond to
breast size and shape, though actual preferences vary and there is no
simple link between the appearance of a woman's breasts and her
ability to lactate and sustain a child. Finally, men respond strongly to
certain character traits, such as meekness and dependence, that might
indicate potential fidelity. Such traits, though, are relatively easy to
fake, at least for short periods.
There is another difference in mate preference between men
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
and women. As long-term partners, women tend to prefer men who
are older than themselves. Such men have had more time to prove
themselves and more chance to amass the resources a woman will
need to sustain any children she may have. Unless he is very wealthy,
however, a man older than about fifty becomes less and less attractive
to a younger, still fertile, woman — because of the increasing risk
that he might die before any children she has with him become
independent.
Men, on the other hand, prefer females who are old enough to be
fertile, but still have most of their reproductive lives ahead of them.
This way, they get more children from their investment. Whether a
man is twenty or seventy, therefore, his preferred age for a new
partner is about twenty, or even younger. Hence the frequency with
which the most successful of men leave their middle-aged partner and
their first family to set up home and begin a second family with a
much younger woman.
An older but still fertile woman might also gain from a liaison with
a younger man. This is because she can judge a man's physical quality
more easily when he is at his physical peak. But more often than not
such a man is in no position to maintain an older woman, let alone her
existing children and any new children their liaison might produce.
Consequently, older women are most likely to target young men for
acts of infidelity from within a secure long-term partnership, and are
less likely to choose them as long-term partners.
The woman in Scene 18 had been freed from constraints by her
personal wealth. She could have invited any of her 'gardeners' to live
with her for a while and perhaps give her another child — they had
all been carefully chosen for their genetic potential. She could
undoubtedly have raised another child by such a man without
prejudicing either her own health or the success of her existing
children and future grandchildren. Nor need she have short-changed
her new child. By the time we left the scene, the woman had not
followed this course, but she still had time to do so. Many rich
women do.
Finally, once a woman is post-reproductive or once a man
142 143SPERM WARS
has ceased to be able to attract younger, fertile women (Scene 11), their
criteria for mate choice change. Choice of a long-term partner can still
influence their reproductive success, but now of course it is not via any
children that they might produce together. It is instead via its effect on
the survival and reproduction of any children they each may already
have from a previous relationship (Scene 11). Wealth, status and the
potential to be a good stepparent or stepgrandparent now become of
primary importance to both sexes in their choice of a partner. All the
same, most people still have to compromise.
We can see quite clearly that nowhere is the conflict of interests
between males and females greater than in the selection and
recruitment of a partner — at any age. Everybody is seeking the best
partner in their preferred category, but may not themselves match up to
that chosen person's preferences. Competition is fierce. Everything is
compromise, and time is limited. If a person settles too readily for a
poor compromise, they may miss the chance of a much better
compromise later. However, spending too long in search of the best
compromise can be equally disadvantageous. He or she may then pay
the price of having to settle for a worse compromise, or even of failing
to attract anybody at all. The best prizes go to the people who judge
correctly when to continue their search and when to settle for what they
can get — if only for the time being.
There is a fascinating consequence of the criteria women use for
mate selection — particularly their preference for, and greater fidelity
to, men of wealth and status. The sons of such men achieve greater
reproductive success than their lower-status contemporaries. They do
this not only through their long-term relationships, but also because
they have the same above-average opportunities to sire children with
the partners of other men as did their fathers. It follows from this that a
woman paired to such a man will achieve greater reproductive success
if she produces sons than if she produces daughters.
The greatest number of children ever claimed by a man is 888 (by an
ex-emperor of Morocco); that by a woman, sixty-nine
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
(over twenty-seven pregnancies). And even at a more mundane level it
is much easier for a man, potentially, to have more children than a
woman — for the obvious reason that whereas a man can have his
children with several different women, a woman (until the recent
advent of surrogate motherhood) has had to have all her children
herself. A successful son, therefore, can give a woman far more
grandchildren than can a successful daughter. The higher a son's
eventual social status, the more successful he is likely to be. Since
wealth and status, as well as the genetic potential to achieve wealth and
status, can be inherited, we might expect higher-status couples to
produce more sons than lower-status couples — and they do. Studies
around the world have shown a male-biased sex ratio among the
children of couples of higher status (take, as an example, the children
of the men and women listed in the national Who's Who). Usually the
bias is statistical rather than obvious — about 115 boys for every 100
girls — but sometimes it can be impressive. The presidents of the
United States, for example, have between them produced ninety sons
and sixty-one daughters, the equivalent of 148 sons for every 100
daughters.
So why don't all women produce an excess of sons? Actually, to
some extent they do. On average, about 106 boys are born for every
100 girls. But because boys are more likely to die during childhood, by
the time the survivors start to reproduce the proportion is about equal.
Even so, not only is the average woman less likely to have a boy than a
woman paired to a high-status male, but women paired to low-status
males and women without a partner at all are more likely to produce a
daughter. Why?
The answer is that a son is a much more precarious reproductive
option than a daughter. Despite his potential to produce large numbers,
he is more likely to die before he begins to reproduce, and he has
much more chance of not reproducing at all, even when he tries. If
they are not reproductively competitive, sons are a poor option.
Imagine a society in which all women produce only two children: for
every man
144 145SPERM WARS
who sires six children with three different women, there will be two
who fail to sire any. There are two ways in which a daughter is the
safer option: first, although relatively few daughters produce large
numbers of grandchildren for their mothers, relatively few fail to
produce any; second, a mother can be certain that all of the
grandchildren produced through a daughter are hers. She cannot be so
certain about the grandchildren apparently produced by a son.
Thus, only when there is a very good chance that a son will not
only survive but will also be reproductively competitive against other
males is it worth producing a boy. So, in principle, we should not be
surprised to find that women without long-term partners and women
paired to lower-status males produce an excess of daughters — or to
find that those paired to higher-status males produce an excess of
sons. Nor should we be surprised that, in between these two extremes,
most women compromise and show no bias towards either sex.
The woman in Scene 18 got it exactly right when she produced a
daughter from her 'accident' while she was still at school, and two sons
when she was paired to a wealthy man of high status. Just how she will
have achieved this bias is not known. The explanation is not that
higher-status males produce an excess of 'male' sperm — the casual
lovers of such men produce an excess of daughters, as they should.
Nor does it seem likely that high-status males introduce an excess of
'male' sperm into their partners but an excess of 'female' sperm into
their lovers. The only reasonable explanation is that the bias is
generated by the woman. Either her body biases the proportion of male
and female sperm allowed through to the fertilisation zone in her
oviducts, or she is selective about which embryos she allows to
implant following fertilisation. Maybe, if the embryo is the 'wrong' sex
for her circumstances, her womb does not let it implant (Scene 16).
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
To most people, the whole process of mate selection is a minefield
of distractions and pitfalls, particularly during late adolescence as a
boy or girl searches for their first long-term partner. The woman in
our scene subconsciously wove her way through this minefield with
precision. She did so by virtue of the excellent genes she herself had
received from her parents. As a result, she ended up with three
children, and perhaps eventually more, all sired by a man or men who
were reproductively outstanding in their peer group. Her daughter had
already begun to produce grandchildren; her sons had great potential,
not only to produce their own families but also to be the targets of
other women's infidelities. She had every indication that her
descendants would multiply and flourish. In later generations, her
genes would mark more of the population than would the genes of her
less successful contemporaries. Her life had been a success — both
biologically and hedonistically.
SCENE 19
Fair Exchange
It was Saturday night and the two couples were sitting cross-legged in
a circle on the floor. With plenty to drink by their sides, they began to
play cards. Each of them was privately tingling with nervous and
sexual excitement. They had great hopes that the next hour would be a
sexual landmark in all of their lives.
They had known each other for seven years. Although they had
always found each other's partner sexually attractive, no infidelity had
ever occurred. The first couple, despite five years of unprotected sex,
had no children. The second couple had two. In recent years, for
different reasons, each couple's relationship had been foundering.
146 147SPERM WARS
The childless couple felt an undeniable emptiness in their lives,
which they could not shake off despite all their money and travelling.
When they first met, they had seemed perfect for each other. He was
tall, muscular, ambitious, witty and dominating. She was effervescent,
open and liberated, always dressing provocatively. Women surrounded
him wherever he went and he could have had a new sex partner every
week if he had wished — and he did . . . often. She, also, was much
sought after. Once regarded as an item, they gained great kudos from
being each other's partner and, despite their earlier promiscuities, had
settled into a serious relationship.
Four years later, after a year of unprotected sex, they had been
screened for infertility but there was no clear indication that either was
infertile. She was ovulating, had no blocked tubes and seemed normal.
He was producing rather large numbers of sperm, but otherwise also
seemed normal.
At first, they responded to their problem with intense sexual
activity, but after a further year of failure they gradually lost interest in
routine sex. Secretly, they both hoped their combined failure was the
other's fault, and this thought had led them to be critical of each other's
sexuality. She now saw his size and power as futile, boorish and
selfish. He now saw her free conversation and provocative dress sense
as public vulgarity, a front to hide her private frigidity.
The couple with children were very different. Both were attractive
in their own way, but were much less extrovert than their friends.
What little social kudos they had came from their association with the
childless couple. The man was small, quiet, hard-working and reliable.
The woman was demure, sympathetic and maternal. It had taken them
eight months of effort to conceive each of their two children but
eventually it had happened and, as a parental team, they were
wonderful. When he was not working they were hardly ever out of
each other's company.
Lately, however, increasing financial hardship had produced
friction between them. Their situation had been aggravated
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
when his employers, dismayed by his lack of ambition and charisma,
moved him sideways to a lower-profile position. Now, increasingly
frustrated by her partner's mundane job, she was often critical of his
inability to improve their situation. For his part, having pushed his
partner into full-time motherhood, he now found her demure quietness
dull and unattractive.
Recently, each couple had sought to bolster their flagging sexual
interest with pornography. But over the weeks the impact of the
images had worn off. Then, when the four of them started to watch
films together, excitement had been briefly rekindled. Even that
source of excitement, though, had eventually begun to wane — until
tonight. The idea for the 'game' they were about to play had been
seeded by a film showing partner-swapping. In the video they had just
watched, the men had thrown their car keys into a pile in the centre of
the room. The women chose a key, then paired off with the owner.
Soon the room was full of naked, copulating bodies.
It was the childless woman who with typical brashness had
suggested they should try swapping. At first they all treated the
suggestion as a joke, but as they became increasingly drunk they
began to talk about the possibility seriously. Soon they were
discussing the practicalities of the exercise rather than its desirability.
They devised a card game, based on chance, not strategy, that
required the winner to remove an item of clothing. It was decreed that
the man who was the first to lose all his clothes should have sex with
the woman who lost all hers first.
A run of wins left the smaller of the two men naked almost before
the others had started. He was far from muscular and had relatively
tiny testes, but his penis was larger than average. As he settled back to
watch the two women progressively expose more and more of their
femininity, he became increasingly proud of his erection. In the event,
the cards were disappointing. In a late run, it was his partner who was
next to be naked. As she
148 149SPERM WARS
removed her knickers, she both surprised and excited the other couple
by revealing a triangle of pubic hair that struck them as incongruously
large for such a demure woman. An immediate suggestion that the
rules should be changed so that partners did not have sex with each
other was defeated by the alternative idea that they should still have
sex, but in full view of the other couple.
Less exhibitionist than their friends, the 'lucky' couple found it
difficult to begin their performance. Laughter, self-consciousness and
a rapidly dwindling erection almost ended the enterprise. Eventually, as
they lay together, it was the serious stroking and kissing of their bodies
by the other couple that took them across the threshold from
embarrassment to intense sexual arousal. The intercourse they had,
while still being caressed by the other couple, was the most exciting
either had ever experienced.
Aroused almost to the point of spontaneous ejaculation by what he
had just seen, the childless man suggested they should abandon the
cards. He should now have sex with the already naked and prostrate
woman rather than with his own partner. Almost before anybody could
comment, he was on top of her. The woman was to relive this moment
many times over the next few years. The emotion she was always to
remember as she felt him, penis even larger than her partner's, slip
gently into her was neither guilt nor excitement. It was instead an
overwhelming sense of welcome. Excitement followed but was shortlived. He had been so aroused that he ejaculated within seconds.
All now naked, there followed a crude and drunken interlude of
about half an hour while they first waited for, then tried to help, the
first man to recover his erection. The childless woman, who had
perhaps wanted all this to happen more than any of them, began to fret
that she would not have her turn. The pressure on the first man was
intense but eventually the prospect of sex with a different woman,
combined with the now totally abandoned sexual encouragement he
received
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
from both women, did the trick. At the childless woman's suggestion,
he entered her from behind as she knelt down, bending forward over a
chair. Watching his partner have sex with another man excited the
childless man once more. He could scarcely wait for his friend to
withdraw before taking over.
They never repeated the exercise. A month later, both women
discovered they were pregnant. They both assumed that the father of
their children was the one who had already proved his fertility. But
they were quite wrong. The father of both was the one who had
previously seemed infertile.
The couples were to stay together for another five years. For a
while, until after their babies were born, both relationships stabilised.
As the children grew, however, both relationships once more
deteriorated. Despite continuing to have unprotected sex, the extrovert
couple failed to produce another child and their mutual recriminations
intensified. The man began an affair with the other woman. This time,
they kept it secret. Eventually, though, they confessed their infidelity,
both couples separated, and the unfaithful pair began to live together,
along with the woman's three children.
Financially, the more extrovert man's life went from success to
success and he was able to maintain in some comfort not only both of
the children conceived that night but also his two stepchildren. By
now he was convinced that he was infertile. However, his increasing
wealth and status and his continuing physical attractiveness made him
even more of a magnet to other women. He was often unfaithful. His
partner knew about his infidelities — but she agreed to tolerate his
behaviour in exchange for a guarantee that, no matter what happened,
she and her three children would be financially secure. In the years to
come, he unknowingly sired two more children via his promiscuity.
150 151SPERM WARS SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
n previous scenes, we have watched men and women going to great
lengths to hide their infidelity. If they failed, they suffered. Yet
here we meet four people who are openly unfaithful. Partner-swapping
is not particularly common in Western society, but it occurs often
enough to form a recognisable part of the rich mosaic of human
sexuality — a part, moreover, that promotes sperm warfare. A survey
in the USA in the 1970s revealed that almost 5 per cent of couples had,
at one time or another, openly swapped partners with another couple,
though nearly 80 per cent of these had done so only once or twice.
What circumstances can lead such behaviour to actually improve a
person's reproductive success?
The answer lies in the way criteria for choosing partners and lovers
can change with time during the course of a person's life. Of course,
when open infidelity was first mooted in Scene 19, the conscious
preoccupation of the four characters will have been with superficial
matters. Excitement and fear will have been relished in equal
proportions — the excitement of imminent infidelity will have been
tempered by fears concerning their bodies and their sexual
performances. Subconsciously, however, their bodies will have been
wrestling with more important matters. Would the reproductive
benefits of their planned actions outweigh the reproductive costs?
The more extrovert couple had an easy decision. After five years of
unprotected sex, they had failed to produce children. Each thought
their partner might be sterile, and here was a golden opportunity to
have sex with someone of proven fertility. Both their conscious and
their unconscious brains might well have reached the same conclusion.
The other couple had a more difficult decision, though consciously
neither would probably have appreciated their body's logic. Their
family was rapidly outgrowing their home and finances. Even two
children might be too many for them to raise successfully without an
improvement in circumstances. So
how could they each have another? The man could manage to have a
third child only if he could find somebody who would raise that child
without his help. His friend's partner offered just such a possibility.
His own partner, on the other hand, could have a successful third child
only with better financial support than he, her present partner, could
provide. Her friend's partner had potential, argued the woman's body.
Not only was he wealthy, he was in a relationship that was looking
increasingly unstable. Maybe, if she had a child which he thought
might be his, he would help her financially. Or she might even be able
to wrest him from her friend, his current partner. On top of all that, her
body could see a benefit in conceiving via this man: not only was he
very attractive to women, he had also achieved a higher status in life.
Genetically, a child by this man could be far more successful than
another child by her current partner.
Of course, some of the potential costs of infidelity were still there
for both couples — risk of disease, for example. But most of the
dangers usually associated with infidelity were minimised by the
nature of the situation. All of the characters knew and agreed to what
was going to happen, so there was no need for deception and hence no
risk of discovery. By agreeing to have sex in view of each other, they
removed all possibility of deceit. Both relationships were already
unstable, and the risk of anybody being deserted by their partner
because of the night's events would have seemed no greater than
before.
All four, therefore, subconsciously computed that they might gain
from a bout of partner-swapping. And as it turned out, all four were
correct. This is easy to see for three of them. The childless woman
conceived. Her partner sired two children in one night. The other
woman struggled initially, but eventually wrested the first man from
his partner, benefited from his wealth, and successfully raised three
children. Without that night of abandonment, she might have raised
only two — and those, with difficulty. Only for the other man is it less
easy to see the value of his decision. Of course, he thought he sired
two more children that night. But he didn't. Moreover, for five years
152 153
ISPERM WARS SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
he had the stress of raising a third child (which wasn't his, though he
thought it was). Eventually, he was deserted by his partner for a man
with whom she had first been unfaithful with his consent. As a result,
he also lost day-to-day contact with the children, for whom he cared
very much.
At first sight, his may not seem much of a success story. However,
as a result of that night's events, the two children who really were his
were raised more easily and given a better launch into life than he
could ever have given them. He still saw them often and gave them
what help he could. From time to time they lived with him for short
periods, and they probably never really felt abandoned by him. If he
hadn't agreed to that night's events, he might have struggled to raise his
two children. And it is worth bearing in mind that, as we saw in Scenes
9, 11 and 16, such a struggle can sometimes have dire consequences.
He might still eventually have been deserted by his partner, but in less
favourable circumstances. In particular, he might well have been less
fortunate in the man who took his place in raising his children. Indeed,
a key factor in the less extrovert man's success was that his friend did
turn out to be a good stepfather. Of course, in part this may have been
because he kept a close eye on the way his children were being treated
in their new situation. Mostly, however, it was because his ex-partner
tolerated her new partner's infidelities. The latter was not by nature
monogamous, but as long as he could be promiscuous he was happy to
help support her children. In effect, she traded his sexual freedom for a
guarantee that, no matter what happened, she and her three children
would be financially protected.
All four gained from their night of sexual abandonment. But if
things had turned out differently, and the previously childless man had
failed to win those two sperm battles, he would have lost out in a big
way. But, in fact, he was most unlikely to lose. He was a sperm wars
specialist, producing too many sperm. His friend was not, producing
too few. Put the specialist in a monogamous situation and he was subfertile. After each insemination, huge numbers of his killers and egggetters
clustered around his partner's egg. Multiple sperm entered the egg
simultaneously and dense concentrations of deadly chemicals were
released by the surrounding sperm hordes. The egg always died. But
send his sperm in to battle, and he was virtually invincible. His huge
armies would decimate those of lesser opponents and, having been
reduced in number themselves, would then send the correct number of
sperm on to seek an egg.
On that night of sexual revelry, the less extrovert man produced
small armies, rich in blockers (Scene 7) and family-planning sperm
(Scene 16). His reproductive strategy in the past had centred on
guarding his partner from other men. Then he could use long-term,
routine sex to produce children at long but measured intervals when
times were good (Scene 16). Twice, he had needed eight months of
unprotected sex to impregnate his partner. Even so, he would probably
have produced more children with his partner had he been more
successful socially and financially. But in sperm warfare he was
doomed to failure.
We discuss the existence of these two male types in Scene 35. We
have already discussed why women sometimes respond to intercourse
by ovulating on cue (Scene 15) and why men respond to the sight of
another couple having intercourse by becoming aroused and erect
(Scene 9). These sexual responses were important factors in
determining the outcome of the scene we have just witnessed. Perhaps
most important of all were the women's decisions to drop the usual
coyness and secrecy that one, if not the other, would usually have
retained, in favour of blatant and open infidelity. The unconscious
motivation was the same for both of them. In their lifetime of
shopping around for genes, they had each reached a stage when it was
worth trying someone new. As things turned out, theirs was a fair
exchange.
154 155SPERM WARS
SCENE 20
Tasteful Display
By chance, their business trip coincided with the first hot day of
summer. The man had engineered the visit and they had been looking
forward to it for days. The weather was a real bonus.
The woman had made a point of telling her partner where she was
going and who she was going with. The last thing she wanted was to
make him suspicious. He was steady and reliable, both as a partner
and as father to their two children, and she didn't want to lose him.
But, at the same time, she felt that she needed some excitement in her
life, and the man with her in the car could be it. He was a challenge,
and he was attractive. She enjoyed teasing and flirting with him — she
even enjoyed arguing with him, which she did often.
In contrast, the man had not bothered to tell his partner. It was not
that unusual for him to go on such a journey or to take somebody with
him. In fact, his partner no longer seemed to care what he did and
appeared to welcome his days away. Secretly, he had decided she was
having an affair. Not that it bothered him much — in fact, he would
almost have welcomed her infidelity, taking it as a licence to pursue
infidelity himself.
As they drove the two hours to their destination, he pondered their
budding relationship. After a year of platonic acquaintance, they knew
a lot about each other. Enough, for example, to know that there was no
way they could live together. Yet, somehow, even this incompatibility
was attractive. Recently, they had begun to touch each other as they
spoke. On a few occasions, like today, they had even greeted each
other with a friendly kiss. He was sure they had an unspoken
understanding. One day they would have a proper affair, snatching and
engineering sex when
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
they could. And, as he drove, he had high hopes that today might mark
the beginning of that affair.
Their business completed by mid-day, they decided to enjoy their
freedom and the weather and to buy food and drink for a picnic. As
they drove into the country, passing field after field and wood after
wood, she began to tease him. He was looking for somewhere
secluded. She pretended not to realise and kept pointing out roadside
verges or open fields near houses — suitable for a picnic, but nothing
else. Eventually, growing hungry, she decided she had teased him
long enough. When he pointed out a small, secluded field, she
accepted. Rows of freshly mown hay lay silver-green in the intense
sunlight. He thought it looked perfect. She said it would do.
There was a large blanket in the car which they took and stretched
out in the corner of the field, part in dappled shade, at her request, and
part in sun, at his. She was wearing a loose cotton dress and, knowing
from the minute she got up in the morning she could engineer a
picnic, had brought a straw hat with her. He had started the day
wearing a suit and tie but within minutes of finishing their business
meeting he had taken off his jacket and unbuttoned his collar. Even
so, sitting there in the field in the heat he looked uncomfortable.
Knowing he was no stranger to nude sunbathing, she began to tease
him again, challenging herself to persuade him to take off his clothes.
The denouement came when she accused him of having something to
hide.
Interpreting her teasing as a sexual overture, he was becoming
aroused. Even so, he felt slightly silly as he removed his shoes and
socks and even sillier when he stood up, took off his shirt, then in one
movement pushed down his trousers and pants. Now naked, he stood
there, penis half erect, wondering what he should do next. Avoiding
any reaction to his nakedness, she simply commented that he would
be much more comfortable now and busied herself with the picnic.
Still standing, he suggested that she, too, should take off her clothes.
She shook her head, saying that she would burn, even in dappled
shade.
156 157SPERM WARS
She took it in her hand, kissed its tip, and spoke to it softly, stroking it
as if it were a cat. After a few moments, she took it into her mouth and
slowly worked backwards and forwards. He tasted clean and waxy.
After twenty seconds or so, she took it out, formed a tunnel with her
hand, and began very slowly to pump. Then she let go, saying she
wanted to watch him finish himself off.
Convinced by now that they weren't going to have intercourse, he
needed little encouragement. If he didn't ejaculate soon, he would go
crazy. As she watched him pump, her gaze switched from his penis to
his face and back again. She watched intently, so as not to miss the
moment. He came quickly, turning sideways so as not to spray her. The
first two spurts shot out so fast she couldn't see where they went. Then
she saw the final three spurts emerge more slowly and drip on to the
grass in front of them. After he had worked out the last drop with his
hand, he too sank back on his haunches.
Almost immediately it was over, he felt depressed and a little
cheated. He had wanted to come inside her, not in mid-air. For her part,
she felt relieved that his urgency was now gone. She also felt a genuine
tenderness for his body and, she had to admit it, some pleasure at the
way she had made him dance when she pulled his strings.
umans are not the only mammals of which the female smells,
licks or sucks the male's penis as part of courtship. Monkeys
and apes do so often. So do rats, dogs and many others. Usually, such
intimate activity follows through to intercourse, but not always.
Sometimes (as in this scene — which involves the same couple as in
Scenes 10 and 26) the male responds by ejaculating in mid-air, rather
than in the female. Is this a mistake — some error in male or female
programming? Or is it possible that when a male ejaculates without
intercourse in the presence of a female they both increase their
reproductive success? Of course, most people would probably argue
that such
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
behaviour is simply the result of the generation of sexual excitement
and its gratification. As we have already discussed (Scene 10),
however, any behaviour that has evolved to be sexually exciting
usually has repercussions in terms of reproductive success. This is as
true for a man ejaculating in a woman's presence as it is for any other
sexually exciting piece of behaviour.
In effect, a man seeks or allows oral sex as a display of health or
fidelity. He ejaculates openly as a display of health and potency. From
time to time, the benefits of such display outweigh any cost. The man
in the scene, for example, gained from ejaculating in front of his
potential lover. Moreover, he gained more than he would have done
from saving those sperm for inseminating his partner later in the day
(Scene 10).
The sperm he ejaculated were shed, not wasted: the consequences
for his next ejaculate were the same as if he had simply masturbated
(Scene 12). Whether a man stimulates himself or whether he is
stimulated by a woman, the number of sperm he sheds is the same.
Only when he has intercourse are the numbers different. Often, of
course, as in this scene, a man does not know until the last minute
whether he is going to have intercourse or ejaculate in mid-air. That
the two ejaculates are different shows how quickly a man can adjust
his ejaculate (Scene 4).
After shedding sperm, the man in Scene 20 had an even younger
and more killer-rich ejaculate waiting in his tubes than he had before.
If the woman did now change her mind and allow him to inseminate
her later anyway, his new sperm army would be as good as, if not
better than, the one he would have introduced earlier. The problem
comes when he returns home to his partner. His waiting ejaculate is
now right for inseminating a mistress (Scene 13), not for routine sex
with a partner (Scene 12) — or at least, not a faithful partner. The
point is, however, that if his partner really is faithful, he can afford to
introduce into her body the occasional sub-optimal ejaculate. If she is
not, he cannot.
Men's bodies seem to work to the following rule: 'If I have
160 161
HSPERM WARS
had the opportunity to be unfaithful, then while I was away so too has
my partner.' In the case of the man in the scene, this possibility was in
fact a reality — his partner had been unfaithful in his absence (Scene
10). So, when he inseminated her later that day, he had the inseminate
he needed. It was the young, aggressive and fertile inseminate
appropriate to immediate sperm warfare, not the defensive, lowfertility sort appropriate to routine sex. Once a man enters a phase of
infidelity, therefore, similar ejaculates become appropriate for both his
partner and his lover. Having sex with two women does not prevent
him from producing an ejaculate suitable for both — no matter how
often he has sex with either.
So the man lost little, if anything, by ejaculating on to the grass —
except, of course, that ejaculating on to grass does not fertilise eggs.
He might have missed the chance of making his companion pregnant.
But even that may not be as lost an opportunity as it might at first
seem. If the woman didn't want him to inseminate her, there was a
good chance that she was not in her fertile phase anyway. Since, as we
saw in Scene 6, women are most likely to have sex with a lover during
their fertile phase, a man has little to lose reproductively by leaving his
mistress to decide when they should have sex.
The man's strategy was to be patient now in the hope of future
rewards. In order for this strategy to pay off, his behaviour in the field
today needed to increase his chances of gaining those future rewards.
He didn't know it, but as the pair of them prepared for their picnic, his
prospects were on a knife's edge.
The woman's body did not want his partnership, only his genes. In
this new man her body saw qualities that would suit her next child, if
she were to have one. She would commit herself to having his child
only if these qualities out-weighed the potential costs of infidelity. The
equation was finely balanced, not least because her potential lover had
so far given no evidence of sexual potency. From her body's point of
view, this afternoon was to be a test of his potential — the final
collection of facts, the final balancing of the
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
equation. Subconsciously, she was not after sperm, but information.
First, there was his body. She had never seen him naked but, when
she did, she found his body as good as she had expected. Like most
men, of course, he assumed her main interest would be in the size of
his penis and muscles. What in fact interested her most in his
nakedness were his buttocks. The best indication of a man's health and
hormones is the ratio between his waist and buttocks. Ideally, a tape
round his waist should measure nearly the same (about 90 per cent or
so) as a tape around his hips and buttocks. Firm, tight buttocks are a
good, though of course not perfect, indication of his health and
fertility.
Next, there was his ability to gain an erection and ejaculate. Not
until he began to kiss her after the incident with the car was her body
finally reassured that he was not impotent.
Finally, there was his sexual health. The best way to check for
infection was to examine his penis closely. She looked closely, then
licked and tasted him. Absence of rashes and sores and a reasonably
pleasant taste are a good sign of health, and her body knew this. The
ejaculate also gives away a great deal. A liquid, whitish ejaculate with
a normal smell is a sign of health, whereas discoloration, particularly
bright yellow or orange, or a bad smell, are often signs of infection.
So, too, are traces of blood.
In those few minutes the woman collected an abundance of
information about the man, much of which would have been hidden
from her if she had simply had sex with him. As it happened, he
passed all of the tests.
It is not only during her first encounter with a potential lover that a
woman might gain from tasting a man's penis. From time to time, she
may also gain from doing so during routine sex. Partners who were
once healthy may become diseased. A woman benefits from being
alerted to this change by seeing, smelling or tasting an unsavoury
penis. She can also use oral sex to taste or smell infidelity (as can a
man — Scene 10). Traces of a lover can remain on a man's penis for
hours. Not only a man's
162 163SPERM WARS
partner but also his mistress can gain from oral sex. The latter will
expect to find traces of her lover's partner on his penis; if she can also
taste her vagina, she can either be reassured that the other woman is
healthy or be alerted that she is not.
There are a number of other ways in which a woman might gain
from making a man display his ejaculate — again, not only on her first
encounter with a potential lover, but also from time to time as part of
routine sex. As well as seeing and smelling his ejaculate, she can be
alerted to possible disease by its taste. She should also scrutinise more
closely a partner who unexpectedly cannot ejaculate or who produces a
small ejaculate. Of course, if it is several days since they last had
routine intercourse, the explanation may simply be that he has
masturbated recently. Even discovering this is useful to her (Scene 13),
but, much more importantly, the explanation may be that he has
recently been unfaithful. The time scale for scrutiny is rather short, but
not so short that a woman cannot sometimes catch her partner out. For
example, many men would have difficulty ejaculating in front of their
partner in the first hour after inseminating a mistress. Moreover, the
volume of their ejaculate will not return to normal for twelve hours
after infidelity.
Despite this scrutiny, a man can still gain from deliberately
ejaculating in front of his partner from time to time. Choosing each
occasion carefully so as to display a good ejaculate can be a powerful
way to advertise his continuing good health. He can also reassure, or
mislead, his partner over whether he has recently been unfaithful. It is
testimony to the success of this male strategy that most women
probably would not notice a smaller ejaculate than usual. This is
precisely because most men do not display their ejaculate very often
— and when they do, they pick their moment. So most women never
get a chance to learn the subtleties of how their partner's ejaculate
normally varies. Consequently, they never get a chance to learn how to
recognise a departure from normality. Any man who does display his
ejaculate too often may find it more difficult to hide ill-health or
infidelity if he ever needs to. In particular, he should avoid
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
placing his penis in his partner's mouth or displaying his ejaculate too
soon after being unfaithful. It follows that a woman's best strategy is
occasionally to pick her own moment to give oral sex, or to stimulate
open ejaculation. The more unexpected she can make those moments,
the more information she is likely to collect.
SCENE 21
An Abandoned Selection?
The girl was wearing only a bikini and a thin see-through wraparound, but she was still hot. She fanned her face with her hand. The
young man next to her in the back seat of the car saw her action.
Nodding and smiling, he mimicked her hand movement in unspoken
agreement. She smiled back, wishing he could speak her language
better.
Under a clear blue sky, the road ahead of them snaked up and round
the side of a hill. The sea was to their left, mountains to their right. She
shouted her intentions to the driver and his male companion in front,
then stood up, poking her head and shoulders through the sun roof.
Despite its heat, the air cooled her as it rushed past. A short distance
ahead, just disappearing around the first corner, was a similar car
containing the other three members of their group. The only other
female, a woman a few years older than herself, was also standing.
The girl tried to attract her attention, but the sound of the wind
drowned her shouts.
Soon, both cars pulled up in a lay-by under overhanging trees. As
the noise of the engines died, it was replaced by the cicadas' loud
singing. The seven people gathered together their bags, parasols,
beach mats and towels, then set off along a tree-lined path, easy and
relaxed in each other's company. Six of them had been travelling
together for weeks, seeing as much of the
164 165SPERM WARS
continent as they could, as cheaply as they could. Since arriving at the
coast a week earlier, their days had been spent on secluded beaches.
Their nights had been spent at beach bars, intoxicated by cheap
alcohol, cheap drugs and good company. It was on such an evening,
two nights ago, that they had met the young stranger who was now
with them.
After a few minutes' walk, they arrived at the top of a high cliff
overlooking sand and sea. Pausing, they took in the view, each
casually putting an arm round the person next to them. The girl had
one arm round the woman's waist, her other round the stranger's. In
sudden exhilaration, she kissed first the woman then the man, then ran
forward urging the others to follow. Once over the brow of the cliff,
they had to make their way down a long, zigzag path, steep and
obscure enough to deter the casual holidaymaker. They were lucky.
They had inside information — the young stranger had been born in
the area. Although he had travelled the world, every summer he came
back to his beloved coast.
The path was very narrow. The girl, in front, did not notice the four
young men walking up the path until she turned the corner and nearly
bumped into them. They exchanged greetings, but she was
concentrating so hard on not falling off the cliff that she failed to
notice the close interest they took in her and the rest of her group.
They were to change her life in a way she could never have guessed —
but even had she known, she might not have cared. Elated by her
surroundings and excited at the afternoon's prospects, she was feeling
particularly frisky.
First to arrive on the beach, the girl took off her sandals and ran
across the sand to the water's edge, soon to be joined by the others.
After allowing the water to lap around their feet for a few moments
the group moved on, following their local friend. They walked
purposefully along the deserted beach towards tall rocks, jutting out
into the sea. As they drew nearer, they could see that the rocks had
'nudista solo' crudely aerosolled in white paint, high up on their
surface.
The six friends and their guide clambered over the first
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
outcrop into a small sandy cove. Ensconced under a parasol, stretched
out in the shade were two naked women. Nearby, their naked children
were playing with a beach ball. A short distance out to sea a small
boat-load of tourists travelled slowly past. At the top of the beach,
almost hidden in the entrance to a small cave, was an old man.
Wearing nothing except a straw hat, he was perched on a folding chair.
One hand held a walking stick, the other rested on his genitals. He was
watching the naked women closely.
The group clambered over more rocks and crossed two more coves,
both deserted, before entering a third, more secluded, one. An
overhanging cliff face shielded the beach from above, and a curve in
the seaward rocks hid it from boat-bound voyeurs. The group threw
down their towels and bags and immediately removed their scanty
clothes. The local man was no stranger to nudity and had welcomed
this chance to take his new friends to the nudist beach. They seemed
to share his relaxed attitude to nakedness and were obviously quite
used to each other's bodies. What he did not know was that at one
time or another since coming on holiday, both women had had sex
with each of the men, as well as with each other.
Almost within seconds of removing their clothes they were all
cooling off in the sea. The younger girl began some horseplay with
two of the men, splashing them, jumping on their backs, and grabbing
at their genitals. They responded by pushing her under the water, then
swimming strongly out to sea. She began to follow, but soon turned
and swam back to the beach.
One by one, they came out of the water. Soon, they were all
stretched out naked in the sun, passing around a bottle of wine and the
first of that afternoon's joints. There was little real conversation, just a
relaxed, drug-induced sense of well-being. The girl was lying with the
other woman, resting her head on the other's stomach. As they talked,
drank and smoked, they occasionally touched and stroked those bits of
each other's bodies that they could reach without effort.
The women stayed like this for nearly an hour, sometimes
166 167SPERM WARS
talking, sometimes drifting in and out of sleep. After a while, the girl
began to feel restless. As she looked around, she could see that some
of the men were also asleep. Sitting up and stretching, she nudged the
other woman and pointed to the young stranger next to them. Fast
asleep, his arms and legs were gently twitching. So too was his very
erect penis. The girl whispered in her friend's ear. They smiled in
anticipation, then went across on hands and knees to the man's side.
There, the girl watched and waited while the woman knelt by his
head and bent forward to kiss him on the lips. He jumped, then
jumped again when the girl kissed his genitals. As the two women
kissed and stroked his body, every part of him relaxed — except one.
And that grew even harder. After a few minutes, the girl sat astride
his groin, massaging his body with her hands and gently massaging
his penis with her vaginal lips.
By this time, the other four men were awake. At first, they feigned
an air of casual disinterest. Watching the women's antics only
intermittently, they resumed their smoking and drinking, passing an
occasional good-humoured comment on the stranger's progress.
Eventually, however, their erections betrayed their true feelings.
The girl, still sitting astride her prey, finally initiated intercourse
with him. No stranger to this position, she slowly but expertly rose
and fell as if impaled on his erect penis. As she did so, her friend bent
further forward to lick his nipples, resting one of her breasts on his
face in the process. Her movement lifted her bottom in the air as if in
display to the man sitting behind her. Throwing down his cigarette, he
proclaimed he could stand it no longer. He moved quickly across to
the woman and, with the minimum of foreplay, entered her from
behind. For a while, the remaining three men watched, then moved
closer to await their turn.
Because of their positions, the two women were facing each other.
If they had bent forward, they could have kissed. But they didn't.
Instead, as intercourse proceeded, they looked into each other's eyes,
sharing each other's mounting sensations. The girl
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
was disappointed when, just as she was building to a climax, the
stranger ejaculated inside her too soon and began to fade.
Having been left high on a plateau of sexual excitement, she
moved off him and in one continuous movement sat astride the man
lying next to her. Hardly had he penetrated her than she climaxed. He
carried on thrusting, but once she stopped cooperating after her
orgasm his movements became awkward. Thrusting as best he could,
he was finding it difficult to build up to ejaculation. He was not
helped by the man next to them who, waiting for his turn, complained
he was taking too long. He was helped even less when the man put
his hands round the girl's waist and tickled her ribs, making her
laugh. Concentrating hard, his thrusting eventually brought him to the
brink of ejaculation. Then, at the very last moment, he felt the girl
being pushed to one side and his penis slipping out of her vagina. Still
laughing, she fell on to her back on the sand and the other man
collapsed on top of her.
The prostrate man was more than a little irritated. After all his hard
work, all he had managed was to ejaculate on to his stomach. His
annoyance grew when, with the girl still laughing, the man who had
spoiled his fun entered her and began a long but gentle intercourse.
He did his best to interfere in return, but the missionary position
adopted by his usurper allowed him to resist being pushed off,
especially once the girl wrapped her legs around him.
While the girl's third lover in ten minutes was slowly building to
his climax, the events around her became a blur, even after she had
stopped laughing. She dimly registered the previous man's attempts to
interfere — and the fact that the other woman was still on all fours
having sex with the same man. The one man who had not yet had
intercourse seemed to be urging him to get off. He was refusing,
saying he hadn't finished. Briefly, voices became raised. When her
most recent lover had eventually inseminated her and removed
himself, the last, frustrated, man left the other couple and moved over
to her. She protested a little as he lay down on top of her and opened
her
168 169SPERM WARS
legs, but he took no notice. Once inside her he was vigorous to the
point of aggressive. Resigned to her situation, the girl at first didn't
mind his thrusting, for she was very wet with the previous men's
semen. But intercourse seemed to last an eternity and, bit by bit, she
felt her vagina becoming drier. It was a relief when he ejaculated and
removed himself.
Orgy temporarily over, the group relaxed and returned to their
drinking and smoking. One after another, they went in and out of the
sea, alternating short spells of swimming with longer spells of
sunbathing, drinking and smoking. At one point, the older woman
invited the local man to have sex with her, which he did. But the
group's orgiastic activity did not really resume for another hour —
when the girl announced she wanted the man who had not yet had sex
with her. This triggered the rest to claim the same favour from the
other woman.
This time round, however, the frenetic atmosphere had gone. Over
the next three hours or so, all five men entered both women and all
eventually inseminated them. But no intercourse was rushed;
thrusting, when it occurred, was long and slow; on occasion, a man
and a woman would stay just coupled together, without thrusting,
while they talked, smoked or drank. Often, the men removed
themselves without ejaculating, only to resume some time later with
whichever female next became free and willing. There was almost
continuous sexual activity, but the urgency had evaporated.
Gradually, the intervals between coupling grew longer as, one by one,
the men ejaculated their last and lost interest in further penetration.
The last to inseminate the girl was the local man. Thirty minutes
previously, one of the others had faded inside her without ejaculating.
She had gone for a swim, then returned to the beach to enjoy the last
of the day's sun. It was still hot. Despite all of the afternoon's activity,
her vagina was still hungry. Without a penis, it felt empty. She
walked over to the prostrate local and sat astride his stomach, facing
away from him so that she could talk to her female friend. Drink and
joints were still being passed around, but less enthusiastically than
before.
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
As she and the woman conversed, the girl's hands idly played with
the young man's penis. When eventually it hardened she impaled
herself. It was a sense of completeness, not excitement, that she felt
when he was inside her. They stayed like that for about ten minutes
— she conversing with the woman, he lying on his back and
smoking. All the time, despite their other activities, their bodies were
making subliminal movements, producing a tiny, gentle, but
continuous thrusting of his penis inside her. This sensation was just
what she wanted. Then, suddenly and unexpectedly, her feelings
changed — she noticed the tingle of a potential orgasm. She
responded first by rocking on his penis more vigorously, then by
reaching down to massage her clitoris. He, in his turn, gradually
increased his thrusting. At first, as sensations mounted, she closed
her eyes. Then, for the second time that afternoon she stared into the
eyes of the woman in front of her. The woman urged her on, then at
just the right moment bent forward and began kissing her thigh. The
girl climaxed, and within seconds so did the man.
An hour later, when the sun disappeared behind the cliff, the group
began the long haul back up. They were all tired, both from their
sexual exertions and from their various drugs. But adrenaline fired
them into activity when they arrived back at the lay-by to find that
their cars had gone. What they didn't know was that they had been
stolen by the lads who had watched them arrive at the beach, hours
earlier.
The loss of their transport in such a backwater was devastating.
The cars had been their travelling homes and had contained all their
luggage, as well as their passports and money. It took an hour to walk
to the nearest village, and then another hour of phone calls by their
local friend to alert the police and arrange a lift back to the next
town.
Without their passports they had immediate trouble with the local
bureaucracy, not least when they tried to obtain money. In the end
they had to borrow some cash from their local friend, just enough to
spend the next two days hitch-hiking to the nearest city where they
could get new passports. They
170 171SPERM WARS
snatched sleep when and where they could. It was while they were
all cramped in the back of a lorry that the woman first noticed how
unusually withdrawn the girl had become. When pressed, she
explained that her contraceptive pills had been in the luggage but
that everybody had been so preoccupied with passports that she
hadn't liked to mention it. The woman had no such problem herself:
as they all knew, she had been having unprotected sex with many
different men for ten years now and was totally convinced of her
infertility. But she immediately worried for her friend. They planned
to do something about it in the city, but the time taken to get their
passports and deal with the bureaucracy, the language problems and
their tiredness made them decide to wait until they were back on the
coast.
As soon as they returned, the girl recruited the help of the local
man, the first and last to inseminate her on the beach four days
earlier. It was a further day before she managed to get hold of a new
packet of pills. By then, the two cars but not the luggage had been
recovered by the police — and the girl was pregnant. The sperm war
between five different armies that had taken place inside her had
produced a winner.
n Scenes 18 to 20 we discussed the problems women face in
selecting a mate. But in the scene we have just witnessed the two
women seem to give up all attempt at mate choice in favour of
wanton promiscuity. What circumstances could favour such
abandoned behaviour from the point of view of a woman's
reproductive success, and what are the repercussions likely to be?
In most societies, relatively few people take part in an orgy in
their lifetime, perhaps no more than 1 per cent according to a recent
British survey of nearly four thousand women. Occasionally,
however, such behaviour is more common. The classic examples, of
course, are historical — for instance, the well documented orgies of
ancient Rome. Anthropologically, there are some societies that have
ritualised orgies, particularly for
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
adolescents, in addition to those that may occur spontaneously.
Taken as a whole, extreme orgiastic behaviour is relatively
uncommon, but in a less extreme form equivalent behaviour is not
so unusual.
At one extreme is an orgy in which a woman, as in Scene 21,
allows several men to inseminate her not only within a short length
of time but also in each other's presence. At the other extreme is
conventional infidelity in which a woman allows two men to
inseminate her over a slightly longer time span and not in each
other's presence. At both extremes, what the woman is doing is
essentially the same. Having selected two or more men (by the
criteria we discussed in Scene 18) as suitable genetic fathers for her
next child, she calls their sperm to battle. This ensures that her child
will inherit not only all the other qualities she has selected, but also
the genes for the production of a competitive ejaculate. As long as
this latter benefit outweighs any associated costs, such as a greater
risk of disease from having sex with two men instead of one, she
will gain from her behaviour.
At first sight it might seem that such a strategy only works if the
woman conceives a son. After all, a daughter will not produce an
ejaculate, competitive or not. And to some extent this is correct —
the sex of the child does make some difference to the woman's gain.
But not much, because both sons and daughters will inherit genes, to
be passed on to their grandsons, great-grandsons and so on, for all
the qualities the woman has selected in the man who wins the war —
including his genes for a competitive ejaculate. The only bonus from
having a son is that the woman will have produced a male
descendant with a competitive ejaculate in the very next generation.
In pursuing this strategy, a woman encounters a major problem
— the men she selects to compete will rarely be given an equal
chance to demonstrate their prowess at sperm warfare, because
when the time interval between inseminations is relatively long, the
outcome of that warfare is determined more by when she ovulates
than by the competitiveness of the two armies. In Scene 6 we saw
that if the woman's partner had
172 173
ISPERM WARS
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
inseminated her just a few hours earlier, he would have won rather
than lost the war. Not because his army would have been any more or
less competitive, but simply because his sudden flood of new sperm
would have reached the egg just in time, rather than just too late.
The closer together in time a woman can procure ejaculates from
different men, the better she tests their ejaculates' competitiveness.
The ultimate would be if two inseminates could be mixed together in
the seminal pool before any sperm were allowed to leave. Then the
ejaculates would have exactly equal opportunities, and victory would
go to the more competitive. But this could only happen if a woman
had two men's penises in her vagina at the same time and both
ejaculated simultaneously. Maybe this does sometimes happen — but
not often enough to be discussed seriously.
Interestingly, this problem of timing can be turned to a woman's
advantage. By adjusting the interval between inseminations by
different men, she can bias the competition to favour either ejaculate
competitiveness or the men's other qualities. Essentially, the closer
together she allows different men to inseminate her, the more weight
she gives to the competitiveness of their ejaculates; the further apart,
the more weight she gives to their other qualities (especially if her
body times ovulation to favour the man whose qualities she prefers).
Always, no matter how much she biases the competition in favour of
one male, another male can still win if his ejaculate is sufficiently
competitive.
Most often, when a woman pursues a sperm warfare strategy there
are hours or even days between inseminations by different men. A
British survey in the late 1980s showed that, in a lifetime (by the time
they have had three thousand inseminations), about 80 per cent of
women have had sex with two different men within five days; 69 per
cent within one day; 13 per cent within an hour; and 1 per cent within
thirty minutes. This suggests that, most often, women have clear
preferences based on the qualities discussed in Scene 18.
Nevertheless, the survey also suggests that on
occasion women do give priority to ejaculate competitiveness.
In Scene 21 the two women allowed, even encouraged, two or
three different men to inseminate them within minutes. They also
allowed five different men to inseminate them within a few hours.
These women had selected five potential fathers for their children.
Now, by having sex with all five in such a short space of time, they
were giving as much priority as they could to the competitiveness of
the men's ejaculates.
At first glance it might seem strange, from the viewpoint of
reproductive success, that the woman in the scene who suspected she
was infertile nevertheless pursued a sperm warfare strategy just as
enthusiastically as the younger girl. We might have expected that she
had little to gain from putting ejaculates in competition. We might
also have expected that, knowing her suspicions, the men would be
less interested in inseminating her than the girl. There was some
indication of the latter, but not much. And what difference there was
could have been due simply to the girl being the younger of the two
(Scene 18). But the fact remains that on the whole everybody behaved
as if the woman was fertile, including the woman herself. Why?
The explanation is that nobody really knew whether the woman
was infertile or not. She may have been, of course -one of the costs of
having many sexual partners is a greater risk of contracting a sexually
transmitted disease, and one of the costs of a sexually transmitted
disease can be infertility (over 50 per cent of infertility cases are a
result of such disease). Even so, despite her suspicions she may still
have been fertile. Natural contraception (Scene 16) can make a
woman appear to be infertile, maybe for years. But then, with the right
man in the right circumstances, she may conceive.
Whether the woman in the scene was infertile or not, her behaviour
will have been unaffected. All her body can do in its pursuit of
reproductive success is assume that it really is just a question of being
inseminated by the right man at the right time, and motivate her
accordingly. Failure to conceive may even make
174
175SPERM WARS
a woman more likely to behave like the woman in the scene. Not
many seemingly infertile women take this promiscuous route to
conception, but some do. The woman's behaviour was just as much a
reflection of her body's pursuit of reproductive success as was that of
the fertile younger girl. So too was their bisexuality (Scene 31).
By taking part in an orgy, the two women were testing the men as
much as possible for differences in prowess at sperm warfare.
Although in large part this prowess will depend on the
competitiveness of their ejaculates, a number of other factors will
inevitably have influenced it — some more than others.
At first sight, for example, some intercourse positions might seem
to be better for sperm retention than others — in which case, males
who manage to engineer the best position will have most sperm
retained and thus most chance of winning the war. As it happens,
coupling position probably makes little difference to the eventual
outcome. The seminal pool is deposited at the top of the vagina no
matter which position is adopted. As we saw earlier, the pool stays
there as the penis is withdrawn, partly because it quickly coagulates
around the cervix and partly because the vagina closes behind the
withdrawing penis, holding the pool in place. Only in the woman-ontop position is there a danger that part of the pool may be lost before
sperm have had time to escape into the cervix. Even then, this is only
a danger if the man withdraws too quickly after insemination.
Not only does coupling position have little influence on the
retention of the seminal pool, it also has little if any influence on the
ability of sperm to leave the pool and proceed to the cervix. This is
because of the cervix's neat design. In the missionary position, for
example, the pool is deposited on the floor of the vagina with the
cervix dipping into it (Scene 3). In the rear entry position, the cervix
is either underneath the seminal pool, like a plughole in a sink, or it
sticks up and hangs back down, like a coiled spring 'walking'
downstairs. In the woman-on-top position, the cervix sticks out
sideways and hangs down into the pool. Moreover, no matter how a
woman
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
changes her position after insemination, gravity will ensure that even
a coagulated pool of semen will slide into a new position. Gravity
will also ensure that her cervix continues to dangle into the pool,
maintaining contact between mucus and semen.
The main differences between coupling positions concern not their
influence on sperm retention but their influence on a couple's
vigilance and vulnerability during intercourse. As one of the men in
Scene 21 discovered, it is much easier to defend some positions than
others. Moreover, the rear-entry position allows at least the man to be
more vigilant (Scene 34).
As far as sperm warfare is concerned, much more important than
the position a man adopts for intercourse is the size of the sperm
army he introduces into the woman. All of the men should have
introduced as many sperm as possible, as it should have been clear
that warfare was imminent. Failure to inject large numbers would
have guaranteed a very poor performance.
However, the men did have a problem of strategy because there
were two women to inseminate. Whereas they should have put a
larger army into their first woman because a chance to inseminate
their second woman could not be guaranteed, they should have
avoided putting all of their sperm into the first because an opportunity
to inseminate the second did seem likely. Precisely how many sperm
they deployed will have depended in part on how long it was since
they last had sex with each woman. Suppose it was forty-eight hours.
In such a circumstance, we should expect the average man to inject
about 450 million sperm into the first woman and about 350 million
into the second. Not all men, however, are average.
If any of them had been a sperm war specialist, such as we met in
Scene 19, he would have had an immediate advantage. His large
testes and huge sperm armies could have won the day. But there
could have been another anatomical feature separating the men —
penis size, as well as testis size, could have made a difference.
Most people see the human penis as functional rather than
176 177SPERM WARS
aesthetic. What most people don't realise is that there is more to its
function than simply delivering sperm to the top of the vagina. The
human penis is a very effective suction piston. Its shape is no
accident, nor is the backward and forward thrusting that accompanies
penetration. The penis has evolved its size and shape to remove any
material that is already present in the woman's vagina. In humans, it is
particularly effective at removing any seminal pool or any as yet
unejected flowback that may still be present. As the penis pushes
forward, with any foreskin now pulled back off the glans on to the
shaft, the smooth, blunt tip of the glans pushes through any semen or
mucus in the vagina. As it then begins to pull back, two things
happen: any material behind the vertical flanges at the back of the
glans gets dragged back down the vagina; and any material ahead of
the penis gets sucked further down the vagina, ready to be pushed
through at the next forward thrust. Rapid backward and forward
thrusting during intercourse thus sucks out any seminal material from
a recent insemination. It may even help to remove some mucus and
blocker sperm out of the cervix. The longer and more rapid the
thrusting, the more the vagina is sucked clean of any previous
insemination. The larger the penis, the more effective the removal.
As each man in Scene 21 tried to claim the prizes in front of him,
success or failure depended in part on how he adjusted his behaviour
according to his position in the queue for each woman's body.
The stranger, the first to inseminate the younger girl, was in pole
position — the man with maximum opportunity to deploy his army
and make life difficult for all who followed him. Even if he had a
chance to inseminate the other woman later, his situation would be
less favourable. More than any of the other men, he had most to gain
from injecting more of his sperm now (say six hundred million), and
saving fewer (say two hundred million) for later. Because he was in
pole position, he also needed to ejaculate quickly. Any delay might
have given another male the chance to physically oust him and
deposit his own sperm inside
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
the girl first. It was because of this urgency that he ejaculated before
the girl climaxed.
Having succeeded in being first to inseminate the girl, what the
stranger should then have done, but didn't, was try to delay the next
man as long as possible. That way, he would have given his army
maximum time to leave the seminal pool and deploy itself. (The man
who was first to inseminate the older woman succeeded in doing just
that, despite triggering aggression.) The girl the stranger had
inseminated, having failed to climax while he was inside her, had
other plans. She moved immediately from the stranger to the next
man.
This man needed to get his penis inside the girl as quickly as
possible after the stranger had finished — the sooner he could do this,
the sooner he could pursue his own best strategy. He would, of
course, have been helped in his urgency by having watched the girl's
previous intercourse. Like most men, he would have found the sight
of a copulating couple sexually arousing (Scene 9). While he was
waiting his turn his penis would have been erect and ready for action.
Once inside her, in fact, he had a choice of strategy. He could have
ejaculated really quickly, reducing as much as possible the stranger's
head start, but the disadvantage of this option was that he would have
shot his sperm straight into the stranger's seminal pool. So instead, he
tried thrusting long and vigorously to remove that seminal pool first
— and paid the price. Because of his delay, he was displaced and
relegated from the possibility of being second to not inseminating her
at all — at least, not in the first round.
Just as it is better to be first to inseminate a woman than second, so
it is better to be second than third. Rather than wait his turn,
therefore, the third man successfully engineered events to inseminate
the girl second, not third. At the risk of aggression from the man he
displaced, he moved in at just the right moment.
The fourth man then had no real alternative. Having been thwarted
in his attempt to be the second to inseminate the other woman, he had
to settle with being the third to inseminate
178 179SPERM WARS SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
the girl. Her vagina already contained a seminal pool from two
different men. His only option was to try to remove as much of that
pool as possible by long, vigorous thrusting. In this he succeeded, for
the girl eventually felt her vagina becoming dry. So when he
ejaculated, his pool had the girl's vagina to itself. But the cost of
removing the pool was that he lost time, and sperm from the first two
men had precious extra seconds to swim into her cervix and prepare
an ambush for the fourth man's army.
It was because the best strategy for all the men was to try to
inseminate each woman as soon as possible that the first round of
sexual activity was frenetic and mildly aggressive. The second round,
though, was quite different. As the afternoon wore on, both pace and
tactics changed. Why?
It is important to realise that winning the first sperm battle inside
the girl did not necessarily guarantee claiming the prize of
fertilisation. It would do so only if she ovulated some time within the
following two days, during which her tract would be monopolised by
those first few armies. If she ovulated not two but four or five days
after the orgy, the situation could be very different. So having done
the best they could to win the first skirmishes, there was some value
to the men in a longer-term back-up strategy.
By four or five days after the orgy, most of the sperm from the
first skirmishes would be dead or dying. As time passed and
ovulation still hadn't happened, the chances of fertilisation being
achieved by a sperm introduced into the girl relatively late in the orgy
improved considerably — especially as these later sperm would also
have been very young. They would be the last to lose their fertility
inside the girl, which meant that if ovulation was delayed they would
have a good chance of claiming the egg. Of course, such late sperm
would have to run the gauntlet of the earlier blockers and killers, but
nevertheless they might just succeed.
The fact that each man divided more or less all of his initial store
of sperm between the two women during his first two inseminations
would not prevent him from pursuing a back-up
strategy. A man adds new, young killers and egg-getters to the back
of his sperm queue at the rate of about twelve million per hour. In the
five hours or so from first insemination to last on that abandoned
afternoon, each man will have mobilised a further sixty million
young sperm. The longer each waited to make his final insemination
of each woman, the more young sperm he would have available.
In the second phase of activity, the men were trying to do two
things. First, they were trying to remove as much of previous seminal
pools as they could. They were going to inseminate few sperm
anyway and so needed as easy an escape route into the cervix as
possible. Secondly, they were trying to be the last to inseminate each
female with as many young sperm as they could manage. Their
problem was that if they inseminated either woman too soon, they
would have fewer sperm and might in any case not be the last
inseminator. If they waited too long, and the woman lost interest,
they might miss their chance altogether. Each man, once coupled to a
woman, stayed in position as long as he could, thrusting as slowly
and for as long as possible, his body trying to judge the best time to
deposit his ejaculate. If he decided it was too soon, he would
withdraw without ejaculating and wait until later. One by one, each
man made his decision and ejaculated his last.
Consciously, of course, none of the men knew anything of what
their bodies were trying to do. As far as they were concerned, they
simply felt different levels of excitement as one by one their
opportunities came to enter and inseminate one or other woman.
When their bodies judged rapid insemination to be best, they
experienced intense excitement and virtually spontaneous ejaculation
as soon as they were inside. When their bodies wanted to remove as
many traces of the previous ejaculates as possible, they experienced
only just enough excitement for erection. They had to work very hard
at thrusting before their bodies finally gave them the tingle of loading
and the climax of ejaculation. During spells when it was best to wait
a while, they temporarily lost interest and their
180 181SPERM WARS
erections dwindled. Finally, when their bodies judged there was
nothing to be gained from introducing further sperm into either
woman, they lost interest totally.
In this complex interplay of reactions and interactions, the man
with the best chance of victory would be the one whose body best
timed his own inseminations, most interfered with other men's
inseminations, and best judged when and when not to couple and to
thrust. It would be this man that the women's bodies were seeking to
father their child. The women's role, in trying to further their own
reproductive success, was to give each man maximum opportunity to
prove himself — and maximum chance to make mistakes. In the first
round of activity, the women benefited most by allowing the men
their urgency and their thrusting. In the second round, they benefited
most by allowing the men to play musical chairs with their vaginas.
In the second round, giving each man maximum opportunity to
couple for long periods and to choose his moment, right or wrong, to
ejaculate for the last time was a shrewd method of selection. By
allowing such lengthy coupling without any other overt sexual
activity, each woman was testing each man's ability to guard her
vagina from other men, maintain an erection, and judge the best
moment to ejaculate — all qualities she would like in sons and
grandsons.
During this long, slow, relaxed second phase, the women's bodies
will have experienced satisfaction simply at the feel of an erect penis
inside them. Not until each body decided it had given the men
maximum opportunity to show their prowess at sperm warfare would
it have lost interest in simply coupling. During the short, frenetic first
phase, though, and once or twice during the second, their bodies will
have looked for a different satisfaction. Instead of the quiet, gentle
feel of a penis in their vaginas, they will have looked for the right
moment to begin a headlong rush into orgasm.
We do not know whether the older woman in the scene climaxed
or not. The girl climaxed twice, once immediately she was entered by
the second man and once right at the end, while
182
SHOPPING AROUND FOR GENES
she was impaled on the stranger. These two climaxes actually meant
that, despite everything, she was still not giving all the men an equal
chance at winning the sperm war inside her. She was still showing
favouritism — and the person she favoured was the stranger. How she
implemented this favouritism won't be clear until Scene 25. For the
moment, the question of interest is why she preferred the stranger.
Xenophilia, a preference for strangers, is a powerful factor in a
woman's choice of mate, particularly as a target for infidelity. In this,
women are typical primates. A female red monkey, for instance, was
observed allowing nearly every new male she met to inseminate her,
while avoiding those she knew. Similarly, female macaques are
known to go out of their way to allow male newcomers to their troop
to have sex with them. They do this even though such newcomers
occupy a very low rank and are often victimised by the resident males.
Of course, a female primate does not allow every male stranger to
inseminate her. The males still have to satisfy her other criteria for
mate choice. The point is that, if two males satisfy her criteria equally,
she is more likely to prefer the stranger. It is generally thought that
what the female is doing here is taking precautions for the future. If
the new male eventually achieves a powerful position in the troop's
hierarchy, he is more likely to behave favourably towards her and her
offspring if there is some chance he is the father.
We cannot tell whether the girl in Scene 21 preferred the stranger
simply because he was a stranger, or because he satisfied her criteria
better than the men she already knew. Whatever the reason, she did
favour his sperm. First, she solicited sex from him both before and
after any of the others. Secondly, she climaxed with him, and only
him, during the second phase of sexual activity. It might seem
contradictory, therefore, that she climaxed not with him, but with the
man following him, during the first frenetic phase. But this is not in
fact a contradiction — as will become clear in Scene 25.
183