Sex and reproduction occupy a major part of people's time -not
so much the doing, more the thinking and talking. Despite all of
this attention, most people find their own sexual activities,
responses and emotions the most baffling of all aspects of their
lives. Consider the following.
Why, in the midst of a perfectly happy and satisfying relationship, do we sometimes get an incredibly strong urge to be
unfaithful? Why do men inseminate enough sperm at each
intercourse to fertilise the entire population of the United States
- twice over? And why, then, do half of them dribble back down
the woman's leg? Why should we feel like sex so often when
most of the time we don't want children? Why, when we least
want children, do our bodies apparently let us down and
produce them? Why, when we do want children, do our bodies
apparently let us down and not produce them? Why is it so
difficult to know the best time to have sex in order to conceive -
or not to conceive? Why is the penis the shape it is and why do
we thrust during intercourse? Why do we get such strong urges
to masturbate, and why do some of us have orgasms while
asleep at night? Why is the female orgasm so unpredictable
and so difficult to induce? Why are some people more
interested in sex with members of their own sex?
These are just some of the questions to which most people, if
they are honest, have no sensible or at least consistent answer.
None the less, riding on the wave of a revolution in sexual
understanding which began in the 1970s but which did not
xiPREFACE
really gather momentum until the 1990s, these are questions
which this book sets out to answer.
So far, this revolution in the interpretation of sexual behaviour
has been the sole prerogative of academics — evolutionary
biologists, to be precise. In this book, my aim is to bring the new
interpretation for the first time within the reach of a much wider
audience.
The potential exists to revolutionise the way we all think about
sex. My ambition is to help the revolution on its way. The main
message from this revolution is that our sexual behaviour has
been programmed and shaped by evolutionary forces which acted
on our ancestors — and which still act on us, even today. The
main thrust of these forces was directed at our bodies, not our
consciousness. Our bodies simply use our brains to manipulate us
into behaving in a way dictated by our programming.
The central force that directed this programming was the risk of
sperm warfare. Whenever a woman's body contains sperm from
two (or more) different men at the same time, the sperm from
those men compete for the 'prize' of fertilising her egg. The way in
which these sperm compete is akin to warfare. Very few (less than
1 per cent) of the sperm in a human ejaculate are the elite, fertile
'egg-getters'. The remainder are infertile 'kamikaze' sperm whose
function has nothing to do with fertilisation as such but everything
to do with preventing sperm from another man fertilising the egg.
Sperm warfare is a story in itself, but it also has wide-ranging
consequences at all levels of human sexual behaviour. In part
consciously, but much more importantly subconsciously, all of our
sexual attitudes, emotions, responses and behaviour revolve
around sperm warfare, and all human sexual behaviour can be
reinterpreted from this new perspective. Thus, most male
behaviour is an attempt either to prevent a woman from exposing
his sperm to warfare or, if he fails in this, to give his sperm the
best chance of winning that warfare. Most female behaviour is an
attempt either to outmaneuver her partner and other males, or to
influence which male's
PREFACE
sperm have the best chance of succeeding in any war that she
promotes.
For each one of us, there was a critical moment, some time in
the past, when one of our father's sperm entered one of our
mother's eggs and we were conceived. That event unleashed a
complex set of instructions for development. Those instructions
were inherited half from our father and half from our mother and
eventually produced the person we are today. If our father and
mother hadn't had sex when they did, with whom they did, having
prepared for it as they did, we would never have existed.
Behind every conception lies a story. But the details of these
stories are rarely known. How many of us know, for example,
whether our mother climaxed at our conception and, if so, whether
she did so before, after or at the same time as our father? Did
either our father or mother masturbate in the days or hours
preceding our conception? Was either of them bisexual or was
either of them being unfaithful to their partner at the time? When
we were conceived, did our mother contain sperm from only one
man or did she contain sperm from two or even more? Is the man
we call our father actually the man who produced the sperm which
fertilised the egg from which we developed?
These things will have made a difference to our personal
origins, and an understanding of the precise ways in which they
did is one of the most interesting outcomes of the new revolution.
Most people, of course, are conceived during an act of routine
sex between a man and a woman who are living together in some
form of long-term relationship. This is true now and has probably
been true for at least the last three or four million years. Such
conceptions might seem humdrum, but even routine sex has its
surprises, as I hope this book will illustrate. And for those one in
five or so people who are not the product of routine sex, there is an
even more interesting story behind their conception. Many such
stories are told in this book.
xii xiiiPREFACE PREFACE
In 1995, Dr Mark Bellis and I published a book called Human
Sperm Competition: Copulation, Masturbation and Infidelity. In
that book, published by Chapman & Hall, we presented the results
of recent biological research, much of it our own, about the
repercussions for human sexuality of the risk of sperm warfare.
We argued that almost every aspect of human sexuality, including
much of the familiar and humdrum, owed its characteristics to the
occurrence, or at least the risk, of sperm warfare. If you wish to
read a scientific justification for the ideas and claims made in this
book, then read Human Sperm Competition. Of necessity, that
book is full of jargon, data, graphs and tables, which inevitably
distance it from most people's experience. Nevertheless, it
contains an interpretation and explanation for all the sexual
behaviour that is very much within most people's experience —
behaviour that often seems irrational and inexplicable. The
research shows, though, that sexual behaviour, in all its mundane,
embarrassing, pleasurable, risky, criminal, amoral and exotic
forms, does obey fundamental rules.
In order to illustrate these rules and to bring the behaviour to
life, I have written this book as a series of fictional scenes. Every
scene involves some form of sexual conflict — between males,
females or, most often, between males and females. Many
scenes also involve one or other facet of the sperm warfare which
I argue throughout the book is the underlying element in all
sexual behaviour. Each piece of fiction is followed by an
interpretation of the behaviour just witnessed, from the viewpoint
of an evolutionary biologist.
The fictional scenes show people acting out those sexual
strategies that have been the main targets for investigation and
interpretation in recent years. While I have drawn evidence about
how people behave from a wide range of scientific surveys and
experimental studies in which, in total, many thousands of people
around the world have taken part, the stories themselves,
naturally enough, are contrived. Their aim is, after all, to show
people experiencing particular costs and benefits of their sexual
behaviour so as to neatly illustrate
xiv
the subsequent evidence and interpretation. My challenge was to
create characters and scenarios that offered a reasonably
entertaining and plausible piece of fiction, while at the same time
reflecting that evidence.
In writing these stories, I have drawn on less global information
than do the studies and experiments themselves — and although
some stories originate in news reports in the media, most derive
from events in my own life and the lives of close friends and
family. All of the scenes have been inspired by actual events.
Even so, my friends should not waste their time trying to guess
identities, nor should the reader waste his or her time trying to
identify particular news stories. Every character is an amalgam,
and every story a mosaic of several different events. Moreover,
every character described could be of any race (and almost any
nationality), and every scene could be set in almost any country.
Not every event in every scene is interpreted on the spot, but
every element of behaviour mentioned is interpreted in its own
right somewhere in the book. For example, I have dedicated two
scenes to masturbation, one to male (Scene 12) and one to
female (Scene 22). After each of these scenes, I discuss the
function of masturbation. Elsewhere, scenes of sexual behaviour
often involve characters masturbating or having masturbated,
without my interpreting their behaviour then and there. But once
the functions of masturbation have been gleaned from their
dedicated scenes, the involvement of masturbation in other
scenes should be clear.
In writing my interpretations, I have tried not to lapse into the
academic style that is my natural bent. I have tried to avoid too
much mention of numbers and, where a particular explanation is
complex, I have tried to give a brief and entertaining version even
if it means sacrificing academic precision. I have also avoided
using the words 'probably' and 'possibly' on many occasions
when, strictly speaking, they were needed. Any reader with a
scientific background who becomes frustrated by the lack of
academic rigour in my text should seek the
xvPREFACE
information and explanation they require in the treatise I wrote with
Mark Bellis.
Not all of my fellow academics will agree with my interpretation
or even with the details of what is going on between men and
women, between sperm and the female tract, between sperm and
the egg, or between sperm themselves. There are people,
eminent in their fields, who will consider this whole book to be a
fiction, interpretations as well as scenes. So be it. The point is that
I have opted to tell a story, a story based on a genuine academic
interpretation of recent research. Apart from this self-imposed
starting point, my primary consideration thereafter is that the story
should be consistent and interesting. I have not even begun to
present all sides of other people's views. To have done so would
have made the book confusing, over-long, even dull. Other
people's interpretations are discussed and appraised at great
length in Human Sperm Competition, in which Mark Bellis and I
say precisely why we think the story I present here is the best
currently available. Having argued the case there, I feel free here
to tell the story as simply and as entertainingly as I can manage.
One of the problems I encountered in writing this book is that
much of the behaviour I am attempting to interpret requires a
totally explicit picture of what happens. Many of the scenes and
details I describe could, in another context, be considered
pornographic. I have tried not to be gratuitously explicit and hope
that, for every scene or detail a reader might find embarrassing or
titillating, the explanations that follow will provide adequate
justification.
I have a further problem. A large part of the behaviour I
describe and interpret is to many people at best amoral and at
worst criminal. In my view it is most important that I do not strike
any moral stances. As an evolutionary biologist, my aim is to
interpret human behaviour without prejudice or criticism. The
danger is that many people will interpret my lack of criticism of
certain forms of behaviour as meaning that I condone or
encourage that behaviour. However, as I explain
PREFACE
in Scene 33 in relation to rape, the first step in dealing with
antisocial behaviour is to understand it — and that and nothing
else is the aim of all my interpretations.
This book could never have been written had it not been for my
scientific collaboration with Mark Bellis. I owe him a great debt.
For seven years, from 1987 until 1994, we discussed, investigated
and argued about every aspect of human sexuality. We did not
agree on everything, but to a surprising extent one or other of us
eventually became persuaded by the other's arguments —
sufficiently persuaded, that is, to collaborate in writing the
academic book that is the scientific foundation for this one.
Although Mark will not agree with all of the ideas I present here,
some of which have emerged since he left Manchester University
to start his important work on the epidemiology of AIDS and other
sexually transmitted diseases, most of the ideas presented here
are as much his as mine. He should not be held responsible,
however, for the way any of these ideas are presented. Naturally,
he is also totally free of blame for my fictional representations.
I am also grateful to Fourth Estate, particularly Michael Mason
and Christopher Potter, for showing what I consider to be great
courage in publishing this book — not because of the subjectmatter but for their confidence that I could actually deliver a
saleable product. Before they offered their support, I had no
grounds for thinking I could write a book such as this, previously
having written only academic texts. I hope the end result has
justified their initial confidence.
By far my biggest thanks must go to my partner, Elizabeth
Oram, who has encouraged and helped me at every step of the
way. She did so despite considerable physical discomfort — the
conception, gestation and delivery of this book coinciding with the
conception, gestation and delivery of our second child. The book
was conceived over breakfast one Saturday in October 1994,
three months to the day after the conception of our child. Without
her immediate encouragement, I would never have dared to begin
this project.
xvi xviiPREFACE
As Liz and the book grew, she applied her considerable writing
and editorial skills to prevent me from making many of the
mistakes that would have exposed me as the novice I am in the
popular genre. First, she saved me from my urge to be even more
graphic in my description of sexual scenes than I have. If the final
results are interesting and explicit — but still tasteful — they owe
much to her restraint and advice. Secondly, she saved me as
much as she possibly could from being outlandishly pompous and
didactic in writing the interpretations. If the book still contains
elements of pornography or pomposity, the fault lies not with her
advice but with my stubbornness and reluctance to kill words that I
conceived with such difficulty.
Finally, as the race to deliver the manuscript before Liz
delivered our baby gathered momentum, she did everything she
could to make sure I didn't sacrifice quality for speed. In order to
free time for me to finish the manuscript she allowed me to shirk
many of my paternal and household responsibilities. Not once was
I made to feel guilty. Moreover, she read and reread successive
drafts of each scene and interpretation whenever I asked, even
late at night. Throughout all the pressure, when I could so easily
have decided that this or that sloppy paragraph 'would do', she
never once allowed her editorial standards to drop.
Her final effort was superhuman! When I failed to complete the
manuscript by the expected delivery date of our baby, she hung on
and refused to give birth for a further ten days. Thanks to the time
she freed for me, I managed to deliver the manuscript to Fourth
Estate just before our first daughter, Amelia, was born on 25 April
1995.
CHAPTER ONE
The
Generation Game
SCENE 1
Great Uncle Who?
The faces in the creased brown photograph stared impassively at
the woman, their gazes spanning the hundred years between them.
She loved this photograph and often asked to see it when she
visited her grandmother. The faces belonged to three young
children, all long dead, frozen in time by some ancient camera at
a moment early in their lives. They were standing in a line, tallest
and oldest on the left, shortest and youngest on the right. The two
boys at either end were aged about ten and two, the pretty girl in
the middle about five.
Whenever the young woman looked at these faces, she sensed a
continuity with the past that she never experienced at any other
time. The photograph showed her great-grandmother with her two
brothers. But, with very little stretching of the imagination, it
could be her looking out from the photograph, not her greatgrandmother. The resemblance between them as children was
uncanny. Her grandmother called it 'the family face', so many of
their clan having the same bone structure and eyes.
The woman looked at the photograph a little longer, then asked
her grandmother to tell her the story of their family 'just
xviii 1SPERM WARS THE GENERATION GAME
one more time'. Before speaking, the old woman fumbled to the
front of the album and took out a large sheet of paper. This family
tree was her pride and joy and she loved showing it and the
photographs to her many grandchildren.
The young woman concentrated hard as her grandmother
spoke, determined this time to remember what was said. She
knew that one of the boys in the photograph had not lived long
enough to have children. Her great-grandmother, however, had
not only survived but had also escaped the poverty of her family
background. She had been a pretty child who had grown into a
beautiful young woman, chased by all the young men in the
village. One day, while working as a servant in a large household,
she had fallen pregnant to the owner's son. The baby was her
grandmother, the teller of the story.
Instead of being disowned and sent away, her greatgrandmother was welcomed into the family. Everything happened
so quickly that, despite gossip, nobody ever knew for sure that the
baby had been conceived illegitimately. The young couple then
lived together in relative comfort for the rest of their lives and
produced four more children. All were boys and, unusual for their
generation, all had survived.
The grandmother then pointed to the oldest boy in the
photograph, her uncle. He had not been as lucky as his sister.
Failing to escape the poverty into which he had been born, he had
worked hard all his life. Like his sister, he also had five children.
Three had died as babies, and one of the survivors, a boy, had
been killed in the war when only eighteen years old. The other
survivor, a girl, was infertile and died alone, in her fifties, a few
years after her partner. The youngest boy, the one with the bright
eyes and smile, had died of measles about two years after the
photograph was taken.
The young woman pored over the family tree with her
grandmother. The tree had the shape of a pyramid, three names at
the top, the three young children in the photograph, and about
fifty at the bottom, the woman's own generation. Then suddenly
she noticed something that had never occurred to her before:
every single one of the fifty people in her generation traced back
to her great-grandmother, the pretty girl in the picture. Not one,
of course, traced back to either of those two boys.
The young woman bent forward to look at the family tree more
closely. She was looking for others who, like the two hoys, had
no living descendants and whose lines on the tree therefore ended
in mid-air. The most conspicuous was one of her grandmother's
brothers, the great-uncle whose name she could never remember
but who was reputed to have had a very strangely shaped nose.
She spotted two more lines ending in mid-air before her stance
became too uncomfortable. Unable to bend forward any longer,
she straightened up and turned away from the paper and
photographs. As she did so, the baby in her womb kicked. She
winced, then smiled and held her stomach. At least her line
wasn't going to end in mid-air.
ur personal characteristics depend on our genes — chemical instructions as to how we should develop and function.
These instructions are packaged in sperm and eggs and passed
down our family tree, finally reaching us via our genetic parents.
And we inherit more than our 'family face' via these genes: we
also inherit many aspects of our physiology, psychology and
behaviour, including much of our sexual behaviour.
This book's task is to work out why we behave sexually as we
do. Our approach is simple. We shall ask why it is that people
with some sexual strategies (patterns of sexual behaviour) are
more successful reproductively than people with others. Our
measure of success will be the number of descendants people
achieve — because this is what shapes future generations.
Families and populations become dominated by the descendants of their most successful ancestors. They also become
dominated by those people's characteristics. In the scene we just
saw, the younger woman's generation was dominated by her
great-grandmother's face, not by great-uncle who's nose. For all
she knew, her generation was also dominated by a 'family
2 3
OSPERM WARS
sexuality', passed on to so many people by the dynasty founders,
her great-grandparents. Nobody will have inherited directly the
sexuality of great-uncle who. Whatever his sexual strategy might
have been, it was unsuccessful and he left no descendants to
inherit that strategy.
It is irrelevant to our generation whether people in the past
wanted many children and grandchildren or whether it just
happened. The only factor to shape our characteristics is who in
the past had children (and how many) and who did not. The
great-grandmother and great-grandfather in Scene 1 were
probably most dismayed when their sexual fun produced a child.
But if it hadn't, the younger woman and her fifty or so family
contemporaries would not have lived. In effect, each generation
plays a game in which its members compete to pass their genes
on to the next generation. Each generation has its winners, like
the pretty girl in the picture, and each has its losers, like her two
brothers and great-uncle. We are the descendants of the winners,
the people whose sexual strategy paid off.
The generation game has not ended. It will continue for as long
as some people in a generation have more children than others. In
our own generation, the game is as active and cruel as ever. It
will still be the genes of those among us who produce most
descendants that will characterise future generations, not the
genes of those who produce few or none.
Whether we know it or not, whether we want to or not, and
whether we care or not, we are all programmed to try to win our
generation's game of reproduction — we are all programmed to
pursue reproductive success. Our successful ancestors have
saddled us inescapably with genetic instructions which tell us not
only that we must compete, but also how to. Inevitably, some of
us will have had more successful ancestors than others, so that
even in our generation there will be some people who have
inherited instructions for potentially better strategies. When our
generation comes to work out its final score, some people will
have done better than others. We are about to start investigating
why it is that some people are more successful than others in life's
generation game.
CHAPTER TWO
Routine Sex
SCENE 2
Normal Service
It is late on a Saturday night and a man and woman in their late
twenties are getting ready for bed. As they drift around their
rooms, attending to the minutiae of life, they are naked. For
them, this is usual and of no sexual importance. They are no
longer excited by simply being naked in each other's presence. In
fact, they now scarcely notice each other's bodies. As it is
Saturday night, they know they will have sex before they go to
sleep. Yet, as they vacantly pursue their separate routines, there
is no hint of foreplay, even when on occasion their paths cause
their bodies to brush past each other.
It is a week since they had sex — last Saturday, in fact. Four
years ago, when they first met, they had sex at least once a day
(except during her menstrual periods, when neither of them was
particularly keen). In those early days they would have ridiculed
the possibility of intercourse only once in a whole Week. Now,
once a week had become more and more common, even though
their usual routine was still to have sex twice a week. Until, that
is, two months ago when they had given up tiling contraception.
Not that they were in any rush to have children. They hadn't
yet contemplated the earnest nightly conception campaigns that
some of their thirty-something friends had delighted in
4 5SPERM WARS
describing to them. Rather, they preferred to leave it to fate (and
so far fate had decreed 'no conception'). They had both found
mild sexual excitement in the possibility of conception and for a
while their rate had returned to three or four times a week. This
week, however, had been different. A couple of separate nights
out and, if they were honest, an unexplained coolness between
them had conspired against their ever quite getting round to sex.
The usual warmth of their relationship had not fully returned
until this Saturday morning as they drove on a pre-arranged visit
to her sister. Even now, as they eventually got into bed, they
could both still feel the legacy of the week's coolness. It was
with some tentativeness that the man made his first faltering
contacts with his partner's bare body. Once started, however,
they quickly slipped into their usual routine.
He begins by gently kissing her face and stroking her breasts.
Then they kiss deeply. He strokes her legs to her knees. After a
while, he moves down and sucks her nipples. All this time, she
cursorily strokes his back and buttocks. Tonight, as is often the
case, she cannot concentrate and her mind keeps slipping back to
conversations with her sister earlier in the day. She is jolted back
to the present when he places his hand between her legs, moves
her longest pubic hairs, opens her lips and inserts a finger to
check if she is wet. He thinks she is ready. She knows she is not
and winces at the prospect of unlubricated penetration. She
moves her hand, finds his penis and gently squeezes, in part to
see how ready he is but primarily to delay his moving into
position. Briefly, her ploy works. He pauses to savour the
sensation and responds with half-hearted massage of her genitals.
Even though his massage misses her clitoris by a centimetre, he
detects (or imagines) an increase in wetness on his finger inside
her vagina. He moves his hand and begins to shift his body into
the missionary position. She keeps her hand on his penis, and
when the moment comes helps to guide its swollen tip into
position. She leaves her hand between them for a few seconds to
stop him pushing too hard, too soon (she is still nowhere near
moist enough). Then, she has no alternative
ROUTINE SEX
But to abandon the act to him. It takes a while before his gentle
working backwards and forwards makes her lubricants really
start to flow and his penis is able to enter fully.
Until she was lubricated, the woman had focused her mind on
his and her genitals and the mechanics of penetration. But once
she is lubricated and he begins the routine of thrusting, her mind
drifts back to her sister. Her attention returns to the present only
when he makes an uncomfortable movement. Despite her
abstractedness, years of practice allow her to time the quiet
noises in her throat to the man's thrusts. Then, suddenly, her
mind jumps back to Wednesday night and the man who had
flirted with her when she was out with a group of her female
friends. Now, in her mind, it is him on top of her. Her heart
speeds up, her breaming quickens, and her noises get louder. Hut
just as her fantasy begins to take shape and she feels she might
even come, her partner makes a particularly awkward thrust. Her
fantasy disappears. The moment has gone, and the next second
she realises he is ejaculating. She makes a sound for each of his
contractions, then relaxes with him as his penis shrinks inside
her. Impatient for him to remove his now dead weight, she
coughs, gently. His limp appendage is ejected, he moves off her
and they slip into their usual post-coital embrace. Both feel
guilty at not having made more effort for their partner's sake and
both feel depressed. Briefly, they exchange untruths over how
pleasurable everything had been before eventually drifting into
post-coital sleep.
or most people, the commonest situation in which they have
sexual intercourse is at home and with a long-term partner.
Rapidly, such intercourse becomes a matter of routine within
the relationship; but, routine as it may be, it plays a surprisingly
important role in the man's and the woman's pursuit of
reproductive success.
This chapter consists of Scenes 2 to 5, each of which
explores one or more facets of intercourse within a long-term
6 7
FSPERM WARS
relationship. Whereas most of the scenes in the book will
involve different characters in different situations, these first
few (Scenes 2 to 7) follow a single couple. We stay with them
and follow their routine sex until the woman conceives and we
have unravelled the full story behind her conception.
While interpreting these first scenes, I take the opportunity
to explain some of the basics of human sexuality. Many of
these will be well known to readers, but I guarantee a few
surprises. Some of the descriptions may seem a little detailed,
but this detail will help later when we discuss some of the more
interesting aspects of human sexual behaviour — such as male
and female masturbation and the female orgasm.
Anyone who has ever lived in a sexual relationship for a few
years should find familiar elements in the scene we have just
witnessed. In fact, it is so familiar that there is a danger of
missing the subtlety of both people's behaviour. Here we meet a
couple who have had penetrative sex perhaps five hundred
times in the four years of their relationship. Yet not one of those
inseminations has led to pregnancy. Of course, they have been
using contraceptives, but from time to time they will have been
careless and the woman could have become pregnant, but she
didn't. Now they have stopped taking contraceptives, but she
still hasn't conceived.
Clearly, they have not repeated this particular act five
hundred times in order to have children. Nor are they unusual
in this. The average man and woman, no matter whether they
live in the bush of the Kalahari desert or in a multi-bedroomed
executive house, will have penetrative sex about two to three
thousand times in their lifetime. Yet, even without modern
contraception, most people have fewer than seven children.
This works out at about five hundred inseminations to produce
each child, though the precise figure is unimportant. Whatever
the fine details of the arithmetic, the conclusion is inescapable.
From the viewpoint of reproductive success, people do not have
routine sex primarily to produce children.
Nor are humans unique in this respect. In fact, compared
ROUTINE SEX
to other primates, we are probably fairly average in terms of the
number of inseminations per offspring. We pale into
insignificance compared with pygmy chimps, who seem always
to be having sex. Outside of primates, the lion, which takes three
thousand inseminations to produce another lion, also beats us
fairly easily. Some birds may mate only a handful of times for
each nestling, but others are about the same as us and mate
hundreds of times to produce each young bird. So why do we,
and all these other animals, mate so often if not to procreate?
How does routine sex help both men and women in their pursuit
of reproductive success?
The explanation usually trotted out is that we (and presumably, therefore, all of these other animals) have sex because we
enjoy it, because it brings pleasure. But is that really true? Look
at the couple in our scene again. Of course, in those first few
weeks of their relationship when they were having sex every
day, the penetration, the contact and even the prospect of just
being naked together was exciting to both of them. Also, of
course, even since that first flush of excitement, one, the other or
both of them will occasionally have gained real pleasure from an
intercourse. But recently, our couple have experienced such
pleasure less often. In the scene we have just witnessed, neither
partner was particularly looking forward to sex and, if they had
both been honest, neither of them actually gained that much
pleasure from their intercourse.
The woman certainly didn't. The whole process was
uncomfortable, even marginally painful, and almost totally
unrewarding. She had experienced far more sexual excitement
from simply flirting with another man the previous Wednesday
than she did from full sex with her partner this Saturday. As for
the man, he was bored during foreplay, irritated at having to
insert himself into an unlubricated vagina, and both bored and
irritated waiting for her to become aroused while he was
thrusting. He had a brief pleasurable sensation in the seconds
before ejaculation, but almost immediately afterwards sank into
a guilt-ridden depression. Moreover, not only had the pair
gained little
8 9SPERM WARS
pleasure from their union, they had both known they wouldn't
even before they started.
So why did this couple have sex this particular Saturday
night, and why will they do it again and again over the weeks,
months and even years to come?
In its most general sense, the explanation for routine sex is
tautological. Men's and women's bodies are programmed by
their genes to seek sex with their partners at intervals, as a
matter of routine, whether their brains can see a good reason
for it or not. Why? Because routine sex can actually make a
difference to the number and quality of children, grandchildren,
great-grandchildren and so on that men and women might have.
It can do so despite leading to conception on only one out of
every five hundred or so occasions. Moreover, it does so
without the conscious brain knowing and, most often, without
it actually caring.
So what is the big benefit of routine sex within relationships
that needs no involvement from the conscious brain? The
precise answer depends on whether you are male or female,
and introduces us to the first example of a theme that runs
throughout this book: what is best for one partner is very often
not best for the other. In this case, what men's bodies are trying
to do is maintain a population of sperm inside their partner.
What women's bodies are trying to do is confuse the man so he
never knows, either consciously or subconsciously, the best
time to inseminate her.
Some female primates, such as chimpanzees and baboons,
actually advertise when they are most fertile each month by
developing large and conspicuous red, crusty swellings around
the anus and vulva and sometimes red skin on the chest as well.
Male baboons and chimpanzees get turned on by these signals,
and are much more interested in sex with the female when she
is at this peak of beauty! The males compete for a female most
strongly during the few days when she is most fertile, and each
male does his very best to prevent her from mating with other
males. Often he gives up doing
10
ROUTINE SEX
other things, like feeding, just so that he can keep a close eye
on her.
In contrast, many other primates, particularly those which,
like humans, form monogamous relationships (gibbons, for
example), hide rather than advertise their fertility. Why? Well,
if the male doesn't know when the female is most fertile, he
can't guard her so intensively. After all, he can't give up eating
and sleeping indefinitely. So, by hiding her fertility, a female
primate gives herself much more control over when and by
whom she conceives. In particular, she makes it easier for
herself to be unfaithful to her partner if she ever wants or needs
to be. This works for women just as well as it does for gibbons.
The elegance and effectiveness of a woman's ability to hide
her fertility from men is breath-taking. On the one hand, her
body creates an environment in which conception is relatively
easy but only if the timing is absolutely right. On the other
hand, her body gives absolutely nothing away to the male that
could help him to get that timing right. The details of this
strategy for confusion are fascinating.
First, as a general rule, a woman's body allows sperm to
remain fertile for no more than five days after being deposited
inside her. Secondly, sperm seem to need about two days inside
the female to reach peak fertility. Thirdly, women produce just
one egg per menstrual cycle, but this egg dies within a day of
being produced by her ovary. What all this means is that for a
man to have any chance of fertilising a woman, he has to
inseminate her at least once during the period from five days
before she ovulates to about twelve hours afterwards. To have
the best chance, which still isn't very high (about one in three),
he must inseminate her about two days before she ovulates. A
day or so either side of this optimum time and his chances
decrease dramatically.
At first sight, it might seem that all a man has to do is note
when his partner starts to menstruate, wait twelve days, and
then inseminate her. That way, his sperm would reach peak
fertility two days later on day 14 of her cycle. This is the
11SPERM WARS
day that many people assume marks the peak of a woman's
fertility. However, the woman's body easily outsmarts such
simple arithmetic: a predictable menstrual cycle is a rarity
rather than the norm, and only occasionally does a woman
ovulate on day 14. The key to her body's strategy is variability,
and hence unpredictability.
The total length of the menstrual cycle, from the beginning
of one period to the beginning of the next, can be anything from
about fourteen to forty-two days. This variation occurs not only
from woman to woman but also from cycle to cycle for the
same woman. Moreover, the part of the cycle that varies most is
the part that would be most useful to the male — the number of
days from the beginning of menstruation to ovulation. Far from
being a predictable fourteen days, this phase can vary in length
from about four to twenty-eight days in any normal, healthy
woman. Neither the man nor the woman can predict the most
fertile day of her cycle simply by counting forward from the
beginning of her previous period.
Of course, confusing the partner requires a female to do
more than vary the day of ovulation and avoid developing a
tell-tale crusty bum and red vulval lips. Even without these
attributes, a woman would still give the game away if she
showed an interest in intercourse only when she was most
fertile. She avoids this danger through a sophisticated veneer of
subconscious changes in mood and behaviour. First, her body is
prepared to allow her partner to inseminate her at any time
during her menstrual cycle, both when fertile and when
infertile. Secondly, her body shows an erratic succession of
genuine, false and take-it-or-leave-it interests in sex throughout
her cycle. If she does show a day or two of sexual interest when
she is most fertile, it is well hidden amongst decoy phases of
interest interspersed with genuine periods of coolness. Finally,
and most sophisticated of all, she confuses her partner well
because she also confuses herself. It is no accident that a
woman is not naturally conscious of when she is most fertile.
The uncoupling of her conscious mind from her body's fertility
is
12
ROUTINE SEX
as important a part of her body's strategy as all the other
elements.
In the face of such a powerful and effective female strategy,
the man has no chance of being able to predict the best time to
inseminate. As a result, the only subconscious strategy open to
him is to try to maintain a continuous sperm presence in his
partner. Hence the advantage of routine sex to him as well as to
her. If a man manages to routinely inseminate his partner about
every two or three days, he should always have fertile sperm
inside her — in which case, his chances of fertilising her egg in
any given month will be about one in three. One missed
insemination, however, could be critical, and in Scene 2 it was.
The man failed to fertilise his partner's egg.
When he ejaculated inside her this Saturday, it was a week
since he had last done so, and his last sperm would have lost
their fertility on Wednesday. His partner ovulated on Thursday
night and, although a few sperm had still been alive inside her
on Friday, when her egg was still alive, those sperm had been
infertile. She did not conceive, and in two weeks' time her next
period will begin. Most likely she will begin to bleed on the
Saturday of that week. We can predict this with some certainty
because, unlike the number of days from the beginning of one
period to ovulation, the number of days from ovulation to the
beginning of the next period is a fairly predictable fourteen
days, varying only from about thirteen to sixteen.
When she does begin to bleed, the couple will almost
certainly see their failure to conceive this month as a joint one.
However, there is an alternative interpretation — that the
woman's body actually engineered the situation to avoid
conception this month, at least via her partner.
We saw earlier that women confuse men by seeking or
allowing intercourse erratically throughout their cycle. But this
is not the whole truth. The incidence even of routine sex does
vary a little during the menstrual cycle.
First, both women and men are less disposed to have sex
while the woman is menstruating. Some human cultures even
13SPERM WARS
have a taboo against menstrual intercourse. We find the same
reduction in rate of intercourse during menstruation in all
primates that mate throughout the menstrual cycle — even in
those, like marmosets, in which no blood flows to the outside,
This reduction in sexual interest during menstruation should not
be surprising, because menstruation is a time of slightly greater
risk of infection to both males and females if they have
penetrative sex.
Secondly, and perhaps this is surprising, a woman is more
likely to have routine sex in the two weeks after she has
ovulated, when she cannot conceive, than in the two or sol
weeks before, when she might conceive. The difference can beg
detected statistically, but is too slight to be noticeable to either
the man or the woman. This subtle change in behaviour is not
due to a conscious decision by couples to avoid conception.
Women using reliable contraceptives, including the pill, show
the same slight changes in behaviour. So, too, do other
primates. The subtle change in a female's willingness to have
sex with her partner at different stages of her cycle is hormonal,
not cerebral.
Engineering when and how often they have sex is only one
of the ways in which a woman's body manipulates the chances)
of her partner fertilising her egg. Another way is to get rid of
some or all of his sperm. Most people will never have looked at
the damp patch on their sheet after sex and marvelled at
women's power and sophistication. My hope, however, is that
after reading the next scene, that damp patch will never seem
the same again.
ROUTINE SEX
SCENE 3
The Wet Sheet
The woman stirred in her post-coital sleep as a familiar
sensation began to tickle her buttocks. She opened her eyes and
looked at the luminous red numbers on her bedside clock. It
was nearly forty-five minutes since her partner had ejaculated
inside her. Now she felt the first hint of wetness emerging from
her vagina. As she hovered between sleep and consciousness,
she tried to decide whether to get up and go to the toilet, to
reach for a tissue, or simply to let the familiar liquid ooze out
of her vagina, dribble down between her buttocks, and wet the
sheet.
During half-consciousness, her mind drifted back seven
years to her first semester as a student. At the beginning of her
final long schoolgirl summer, she had met a male college
student, two years older than her. Within days of meeting they
had sex and thereafter did so whenever the opportunity
presented itself. At first they had used condoms, but eventually
she had agreed to go on the pill. When summer was over and
they had each gone to their separate colleges, they had, for a
few months, continued their relationship, taking it in turns at
weekends to visit each other in their tiny flats. On such
weekends, they always spent the Sunday afternoon in bed
having sex. Invariably, they would stay in bed until the very
last moment. Then there would be a mad scramble to dress and
get to the station in time to catch the last train. Whenever she
was returning from visiting him she could guarantee that no
sooner would she have just settled comfortably in her seat than
she would begin to feel the fruits of their intercourse seeping
out on to her knickers. She would then spend the rest of the
journey with a clammy sensation between her legs.
14 15SPERM WARS
Now, seven years later, lying in bed, she stirred into
wakefulness. With great effort she got out of bed, made her way
unsteadily to the toilet, switched on the light, sat down and,
urinated. As she stood up to flush the cistern she looked down
into the bowl. There, in the water, were four white, almost
spherical globules. It crossed her sleepy mind as she went back
to bed that maybe she hadn't yet conceived because she had a
problem retaining sperm. However, no sooner had the thought]
come than it had gone, and within a minute of lying down she
was asleep. Tonight, at least, the sheet had remained dry.
here are probably few aspects of sex as misunderstood
and maligned as the 'flowback', that collection of material
that flows back out of the vagina sometime after
intercourse. To most people it is an irritation and to some even a
worry, a threat to their fertility.
The flowback is a joint man-woman production. The main
part is the seminal fluid introduced by the man, almost all of
which is ejected from the vagina. To this the woman adds a
quantity of mucus from her cervix. There are also cells from the
inside of the vagina, dislodged by the thrusting of the penis. But
the most common cells in the flowback are the sperm — and
there are usually millions of them. From the human perspective,
it is difficult to see the flowback as anything other; than a
negative, passive event. At first sight it might seem an
impossible transformation of image to convert a damp patch] on
the sheet or a dribble down the leg into a positive, dynamic
event. Yet that is just what I want to try to do. I want to argue
that the flowback is one of a woman's major weapons in her
pursuit of reproductive success.
One of my favourite photographs of recent years is of a
family of zebra: a stallion, a mare and a young foal. The stallion
has just inseminated the mare and is still standing on his hind
legs, his front legs on her back. The foal is looking the other
way, seemingly embarrassed to watch, as its mother ejects from
her
ROUTINE SEX
vagina a dramatic gush of flowback. In zebra, within minutes of
insemination, the mare promptly ejects a major part of the
stallion's ejaculate. Women are not as blatant as female zebra,
and it might seem that a dribble down the leg can hardly
compare with the zebra's vigorous response. But as part of my
research I have had to take a closer interest in flowbacks than
perhaps most people, and I can report that women need not,
actually, feel at all inferior in this respect.
The woman in Scene 3 noticed white globules in the toilet
after she had urinated. If you are female, try using a mirror to
watch the flowback emerge when you urinate about thirty to
forty-five minutes after intercourse. You can't do this on a
toilet, so instead try urinating into an empty bath. Crouch down.
Separate your pubic hairs and vulval lips so that the urine will
squirt forward. Choose your moment. Wait until you can feel
that the flowback is gathering, then urinate. Viewing it from the
side you will see that the urine stream shoots forward out of the
urethra while, a centimetre or so lower down, when the correct
muscles contract, the flowback is squirted out of the vagina
with impressive force. (If you are male, see if you can persuade
your partner to let you watch her eject the flowback.) Whether
you are male or female, you will be left in very little doubt that
the flowback is the female's ejection of part of the inseminate
that she has just received from the male.
Women and zebra are not the only two female animals able
to do this. Monkeys, rabbits, mice, sparrows — and probably all
other female mammals and birds — also eject a flowback.
How do females do it? Before I can explain what happens in
humans, I need to do two things. First, I need to describe in
some detail the architecture of a woman's reproductive tract.
Secondly, I need to describe what happens to the ejaculate in
that critical first half-hour or so after insemination. These
descriptions will take some time.
Imagine that you are a doctor and that you are just about to
give the woman on the bed in front of you an internal
examination. She is lying on her back. First, you part any pubic
16 17
TSPERM WARS
hair that is in the way and separate the main lips so that you
can see the entrance to her vagina. The chamber just inside is
the vestibule. If your eyesight is good and you separate the
vulval lips well enough you will see, opening into the top of
the vestibule, the urethra through which she urinates.
Next, you slip two fingers between the vulval lips into her
vagina and gently push them as far as they will go. First, note
that the vagina is in contact with your fingers all the way
round. This is because, when there is nothing inside it, the
vagina is not a tunnel but a slit, with the two walls pressed
together. And not only is the vagina not a tunnel, it is not even
a throughway. The popular image of it as a tube leading
straight into the womb through the cervix is quite wrong. It is
also quite wrong to imagine that dead-eye dicks can actually
shoot their ejaculate, through the cervix straight into the womb.
Both of these images are false because the vagina is, in fact, a
dead-end. Of course, there is an exit into the womb, but it is not
straight ahead; to find that exit requires virtually a right-angled
turn.
Without withdrawing your fingers, turn your hand so that its
back is on the bed and your palm is facing upwards. The womb,
which is pear-shaped, is balanced on top of the far end of the
vagina, probably just beyond your fingertips. The narrow end of
the pear is the cervix and it is the cervix that penetrates the roof
of the vagina, projecting through by a couple of centimetres. If
your fingers are long enough — many aren't — their tips can
feel the cervix sticking through the vaginal roof. The cervix has
a narrow channel running though it, and it is this channel which
connects the vagina to the inside of the womb and through
which the sperm must pass on their way in. It is also through
this channel that, in a phenomenal feat of engineering and
elasticity, a baby must pass on its way out. For the moment,
though, let's concentrate on the narrowness of the channel and
on sperm going in.
The channel through the cervix is not empty. It is filled with
mucus and, if you leave your fingers inside this woman long
enough, some cervical mucus will flow out on to them. This
ROUTINE SEX
is the woman's main contribution to the flowback and it has a
starring role in this book. To understand much of human
sexuality, we need to appreciate the beauty of a woman's
mucus and the amazing things she does with it. She has
complex requirements of her cervical mucus. On the one hand,
it is her last defence against the bacteria and other disease
organisms which are forever trying to invade her cervix and
womb. On the other hand, she needs it to allow passage to
sperm on their way in and to her menstrual flow on its way out.
In other words, she needs it to function as a two-way filter.
Most people think of mucus rather contemptuously as a messy,
amorphous substance, probably because their main contact is
with the mucus that comes out of their noses. Cervical mucus
may look and feel like nose mucus, but it is in fact very
different. It is wonderful stuff with an immaculate structure
and is absolutely vital to a woman's health, safety — and
sexual power. It contains fibres and is permeated by channels.
Most of these channels are very narrow, some only the
width of two sperm heads side by side, but they are none the
less the highways through which sperm swim as they migrate
from the vagina to the inner regions of the cervix and beyond.
Cervical mucus is secreted continuously, primarily by glands
in the top half of the cervix, furthest from the vagina. After
being secreted, it slowly flows in glacier-like fashion down
through the cervix, eventually dripping into the vagina. The rate
of flow of this cervical glacier is slow compared with the speed
of a swimming sperm but fast compared with the speed of
invading disease organisms. Bacterial and other invaders are
carried out of the cervix back into the vagina before they can
take hold. In the vagina, they are killed by the acidity of the
vaginal juices. During menstruation, the menstrual flow simply
adds to the mucus flow. The double flow makes it even more
difficult for disease organisms to invade — especially important
because during menstruation the raw lining to the womb makes
it particularly vulnerable.
18 19SPERM WARS
The demands that women make on their cervical mucus at
particularly great because of their strategy of copulating where
they would seem to have little use for sperm. We have already
discussed why women have sex at infertile stages of their
menstrual cycle (Scene 2) — to confuse men. Post-menopausal
women also copulate to confuse men, often continuing to be
sexually active for many years after their last period. By
preventing a partner from identifying the end of her
reproductive life with certainty, a post-menopausal woman is
able to reduce the chances of being deserted for a younger,
more fertile woman. In fact, women who are apparently postmenopausal can occasionally conceive — at least up to the age
of fifty-seven and reportedly up to the age of seventy (Scene
34). Even pregnant women continue to copulate – again to
confuse men, but for particular reasons that we shall discus in
connection with Scene 17.
At all times, a woman has to balance the advantages of
letting sperm through and keeping disease organisms out
Clearly, making life easier for sperm makes it easier for disease
organisms too. During pregnancy, a woman has no us for the
sperm she collects during copulation, and she ejects the whole
inseminate in her flowback; her cervical filter makes life
impossible for sperm in order to maximise her defence against
disease. At all times other than during pregnancy, however, ;
sexually active woman may have some use for sperm, and she
then needs to sacrifice some of her defence against disease in
order to allow sperm through. And just as the advantage of
allowing sperm passage varies over the span of her life and
during her menstrual cycle, so too does the strength of her
cervical filter.
A non-pregnant woman has least use for sperm during the
sub-fertile phases of her life (such as during most of each
menstrual cycle and after the menopause). Even during these
phases, though, she gains some benefit from allowing sperm
passage, because sperm allowed through during a sub-fertile
phase can influence the sperm present at the beginning of
ROUTINE SEX
any next fertile phase (as we shall first see in Scene 7). But
since the advantage of retaining sperm during sub-fertile
phases is relatively small, a woman can afford to make her
cervical filter more hostile to sperm in order to increase her
defence against infection. At the approach of ovulation, the
advantage of allowing more sperm through her cervix naturally
increases, so she makes things as easy as possible for sperm at
this time. The way she facilitates or impedes sperm passage
during fertile and sub-fertile phases is by altering the nature of
the cervical mucus.
Throughout a woman's many and long infertile phases,
cervical mucus is made difficult to penetrate. The narrow
mucus channels are small in number, and although sperm can
enter the mucus, few can swim through it. Even those that can
penetrate do so more slowly. During this phase the flow of
mucus is slow, but fast enough to do its job of combating
disease. In contrast, during her short fertile phases, the mucus
changes: it becomes much more liquid and stretchy and the
channels become bigger. It is more easily invaded by both
sperm and bacteria.
The only major problem faced by invading sperm during a
Woman's fertile phases is that not all channels are clear of the
blockages referred to earlier. To remove these, and to combat
the increased risk of infection, the woman increases the flow
rate of her mucus. This way she flushes out cells, bacteria and
other debris. She is aware of being wet more of the time and a
clear, sweet-smelling secretion appears on her underwear.
Although the benefit of these changes in the cervical mucus
is clear, they could create a problem. They could threaten a
woman's attempts to hide her fertile phase from both her
partner and herself (Scene 2). Her body overcomes this threat
by making the increase in mucus secretion more erratic and
more spread out than would be necessary just to aid the
passage of sperm through her cervix. The mucus symptoms
can occur more than a week before ovulation and can continue
for two or
20
21SPERM WARS
more days afterwards. Consequently, although cervical mucus
gives some clue as to the timing of a woman's fertile phase, it is
too unpredictable to ruin her overall strategy.
So, cervical mucus is an adequate sperm filter in its own right.
And no matter what the phase of her menstrual cycle, a woman
can enhance the mucus's filtering efficiency by blocking the
channels. The more channels she blocks, the stronger the filter. So
what does she use to block her mucus channels? There are three
things. One is the blood, tissue and other debris from
menstruation. Another is white blood cells (Scene 4). 4). And the
third is sperm (Scene 7). These blocks may last for several days
but are eventually lost when they are carried inexorably by the
cervical glacier of mucus into the vagina. Later, we shall see that
this ability of a woman to enhance, or not to enhance, her cervical
filter is a most powerful weapon in her attempts to outsmart men
(Scenes 22 to 26).
Even once it is in the vagina, the mucus's job is not finished. It
flows down the walls of the vagina, coating them with a thin film.
Some exits, contributing to the 'wetness' a woman feels on her
vaginal lips. Much of the mucus film, however, remains on her
vaginal walls — representing advance preparation for her next
intercourse, even if it does not happen for days. When she
eventually becomes aroused during foreplay, her vaginal walls
begin to 'sweat'. The sweat itself is not slippery. But when it
mixes with the film of old cervical mucus, the result is a very
effective lubricant. The vagina is now ready for penetration and
intercourse.
We now have all the information necessary to follow the
events that take place from first penetration of the vagina by a
penis to the production of the flowback. But to help us along, we
require a change of image from that of the internal medical
examination that we have used so far. What I am about to
describe was first filmed by strapping a fibre-optic endoscope to
the underside of a man's penis just before he and his partner had
sex. This gave a penis's-eye view of what happened; so, to
ROUTINE SEX
help me in my description, suppose that you have volunteered to
take part in such an experiment. You are having intercourse in the
missionary position and your erect penis (if you are male) Or your
partner's (if you are female) has a camera on its tip. You can see
what is being filmed on a big TV screen on the wall in front of
you.
As the penis pushes forward into the vagina for the first time,
the vagina walls part and, when the penis is fully in, you can see
the blind end of the vagina some distance ahead. Still slightly
ahead, sticking through the vagina's roof, is the cervix. At the
moment, with its central, dimple-like opening, it looks like a pink
sea anemone shorn of its tentacles. But it will change as
intercourse proceeds.
If you watch the screen when thrusting begins, you will see that
each time the penis pulls back the vagina walls dose behind it.
Each time the penis pushes forward, the walls part. Whenever the
penis is fully inserted, you can see the end wall of the vagina and
the protruding cervix. As thrusting continues, the picture at full
insertion changes. The far end of the vagina becomes more like a
chamber, slowly filling with air and becoming slippery with
mucus. Even more dramatically, the cervix begins to stretch and
hang down more and more. Gradually it looks less and less like a
sea anemone and more and more like a pink, rather broad,
elephant's trunk. Eventually, all you see in front of the fully
inserted penis is the front wall of the cervical trunk. Its opening
points down to the vaginal floor and cannot really be seen.
Towards the climax of intercourse, the cervical opening may even
rest on the vaginal floor. When the penis ejaculates, the spurts of
semen hit the front wall of the cervix and run down on to the floor
of the vagina, forming a pool at the bottom of the chamber.
Hanging down, dipped into this pool of semen, for all the world
like an elephant's trunk at a watering hole, is the cervix.
After a minute or so, with ejaculation complete, the penis
begins to shrink. As it does so, the vaginal walls close behind
22 23SPERM WARS
it, helping it out but keeping the pool of semen in. With the
shrinking of the penis, we lose our camera-bearer and our TV
screen goes dark. However, by now it doesn't matter much —
although critical events are taking place, these are chemical and
microscopic rather than obvious.
The first thing that happens — and we might almost have seen
this on our TV screen just before the penis shrank too far down the
vagina — is that the seminal pool coagulates, becoming slightly
less watery and slightly more jelly-like. The second thing that
happens is that sperm start to migrate out of the seminal pool.
Their destination is the cervical channel, which they can enter
only by passing through the interface which forms between the
cervical mucus and the semen. Imagine that the cervix really is an
elephant's trunk, dipping into a large pool of semen. The trunk is
full of mucus. This mucus, however, does not dissolve in or even
mix with the semen when the two come into contact. Instead,
something much more structured takes place.
The interface between mucus and semen at the mouth of the
cervical trunk is not flat. 'Fingers' of semen enter some of the
larger channels in the cervical mucus, and grow. They penetrate a
short distance into the cervical trunk, stretching upwards into the
mucus like the fingers of a rubber glove. Sperm frantically swim
into these fingers, and from there stream into the narrower
channels of the mucus, leaving the seminal fluid behind. Later we
shall follow these sperm further, but for the moment our interest
is in the flowback.
After a few minutes dipped into the seminal pool, the cervical
trunk begins to shrink back to the roof of the vagina,
metamorphosing once more from elephant's trunk to sea
anemone. It loses contact with the seminal pool and hence cuts
off the upwards escape route for the sperm. Once the cervix has
withdrawn, those sperm still in the pool are condemned to
ejection and an early death. About fifteen minutes after
ejaculation, the pool begins to decoagulate and becomes more
watery again. Soon, imperceptible and unconscious muscular
ROUTINE SEX
ripples begin to massage the mixture of old semen, mucus, sperm
and other cells down the vagina. Eventually, the mixture collects
in the vestibule. On average, this happens about half an hour after
ejaculation, but can occur as soon as ten minutes or as long as two
hours. Before this, a woman can stand up, walk around, even
urinate, and she will not eject the flowback. Once the flowback
has collected in the vestibule, however, any one of these activities,
or even a cough or sneeze, will rid her of the unwanted material.
Even if she stays asleep, the flowback becomes so liquid after
about two hours that it will eventually begin to seep out anyway,
producing the wet sheet.
On average, the flowback contains about half of the sperm that
have been introduced — sometimes more, sometimes less. How
many depends in part on the severity of the woman's cervical
filter. Quite often (about one in ten occasions) the filler is so
severe that she ejects almost all of the inseminate; more rarely, her
filter is so weak that she keeps nearly all. Most important of all,
the proportion of sperm that she keeps It not due to simple chance.
To a large extent, it is under the control of her body — and not
just her cervical filter. Each time she has sex, a woman's body
decides how many sperm to keep and how many to eject. How
and why, we shall see later. It won't be long before this female
ability becomes very important in the lives of our couple. But not
just yet.
24 25SPERM WARS
Scene 4
Topping Up
Over the next two weeks the couple became quite active, sexually.
The coolness of the woman's fertile week evaporated. Both
partners went through a phase of anticipating and enjoying their
sexual activity more than they had for about a year. After making
up on the Saturday night, they had sex twice on the Sunday, once
in the morning when they first woke and again in the afternoon at
about three o'clock. Half an hour later, they even tried again. He
had an impressive erection but, despite ten minutes of intermittent
thrusting and encouragement, he eventually had to accept that he
wasn't going to ejaculate. Then they missed a few days.
Wednesday night was the woman's weekly night out with
girlfriends; Thursday night the man's weekly night out 'with the
boys'. On both nights, when the reveller eventually crawled into
bed, the partner was asleep, or at least pretending to be. On Friday
night, however, they had sex and did so again on both Saturday
and Sunday. The next week followed a similar pattern, until the
woman's period began on the Saturday morning. Then they
abstained until the following Saturday, by which time her
menstrual bleeding had finished.
ew couples have their routine sex at absolutely fixed
intervals. In the four weeks we have been following this
couple, they have had penetrative sex ten times and the woman
has been inseminated nine times. But the time interval from one
intercourse to the next has varied from as short as thirty minutes
(albeit without ejaculation) or seven hours (with ejaculation) to as
long as seven days.
ROUTINE SEX
Men get a fairly rough deal in this book. Our story will be one
of men's bodies forever trying to make the best of a bad job, while
the woman's body outsmarts and outmanoeuvres them at almost
every turn. But this at first sight uninspiring scene does give us an
opportunity to watch men doing something fairly impressive. A
man may not look particularly sophisticated at the moment of
ejaculation, but something remarkable is, in fact, taking place.
Each time he has intercourse during routine sex, he introduces no
more sperm than are needed to 'top up' his partner. How does such
restraint help him in his pursuit of reproductive success? To
understand what the man is trying to do, we have to follow further
those sperm we last saw swimming through the channels in the
woman's cervical mucus.
A small proportion of these sperm, the vanguard, swim straight
through her cervix into the womb. Except when she is pregnant,
her womb is roughly pear-sized as well as pear-shaped. As with
the vagina, the walls press closely together, so there is little space
inside. Once in the womb, sperm swim close to the walls and are
helped by the womb to reach its top, the widest part of the pear: in
effect, they surf-board, carried on the crests of muscular ripples
passing along the womb's walls. At the top of the womb on each
side (where horns would be if the pear shape of the womb were a
bull's face) is the opening to a narrow tube, the oviduct. Although
there are two oviducts, only one will contain an egg during any
given menstrual cycle. Once out of the womb, the sperm swim a
short distance along an oviduct until they reach a rest area. Here
they cease swimming, settle down, and await developments.
Back in the cervical mucus, another set of sperm swim along
more diagonal channels and stream into tiny crypts in the wall of
the cervix. These sperm also, once in the crypts, cease swimming,
settle down, and conserve their energy. Over the next four to five
days they will gradually wake up and re-enter the cervical
channel. Then they, too, will complete their journey through the
mucus, surf-board through the womb, and head for the rest area in
the oviducts.
The final set of sperm simply stay in the cervical mucus. They
26 27
FSPERM WARS
just sit there, cluttering up the mucus channels. Eventually they die
— or are killed. Their lethal assailants are the marauding hordes of
white blood cells which are unleashed by the female from the walls
of her womb within minutes of insemination. As they advance
through the cervical mucus, these killer cells engulf and digest live
and dead sperm alike. At their peak the white blood cells can
match the numbers of sperm, but within twenty-four hours of
insemination these hordes have gone, leaving behind much smaller
numbers to complete the mopping-up operation. Multitudinous
though the white cells may be, they do not pursue sperm into the
cervical crypts.
An average inseminate contains about three hundred million
sperm. Of these, the woman will eject about 150 million in the
flowback. A few hundred sperm may go straight to the oviducts
and about a million may first go into the cervical crypts to form
reservoirs, leaving in order to complete their journey to the
oviducts over the next five days. In all, about twenty thousand
sperm from each inseminate eventually pass through the oviducts.
The remainder, those not ejected in the flowback, clutter up the
cervical mucus, eventually to be mopped up by white cells or
carried by the slow, glacier-like flow of the cervical mucus (Scene
3) back into the vagina.
It might seem exceedingly wasteful to introduce three hundred
million sperm when only about a million enter reservoirs. But all is
not what it seems. As far as topping up the woman is concerned,
the important point is that the size of the reservoirs depends on
how many sperm the man introduces. If he puts in only two
hundred million, then the reservoirs will be only half as full as if he
put in four hundred million.
From every insemination, a man and woman contrive between
them to produce a steady passage of fresh sperm through each
oviduct over a period of about five days. This traffic probably
peaks about one to two days after insemination, then gradually
declines as the reservoirs of sperm in the cervical crypts slowly
shrink. This is where topping up comes in. If the male can keep the
reservoirs of sperm in the cervical crypts topped up, he can
ROUTINE SEX
ensure a continuous passage of fresh sperm to the rest areas in
the oviducts. If he injects more sperm than are needed, they
will be wasted; the reservoirs will overflow and even more
sperm will simply hang around in the cervical mucus and fall
prey to the female's white cells. There is also a danger that too
many sperm will arrive in the oviduct and, with a surfeit of the
chemicals that they carry on their heads (Scene 7), actually
kill any egg that may be present. On the other hand, if the man
doesn't fill the reservoirs enough, too few sperm will arrive in
the oviduct or the reservoirs will dry up prematurely. The
man's challenge I to adjust the number of sperm he introduces
according to the number needed to top up his partner's
reservoirs. This he seems to do with remarkable precision.
The adjustments we are talking about are roughly as
follows. If more than a week has passed since the man last
inseminated his partner, her reservoirs will be empty and he
will introduce a full load of sperm, say four hundred million.
Of these, perhaps just over a million will fill the reservoirs. If
the gap is only three days, he will introduce about two
hundred million, and half a million will top up the half-empty
reservoirs. If the gap is only three hours, he will introduce
about thirty million and if only a few minutes, he won't
introduce any. Even after half an hour, he may find it difficult
to ejaculate, like the man in our scene. His body is effectively
saying that there is no point. His partner's reservoirs are full
and any sperm ejaculated will simply be wasted.
Our couple have had penetrative sex ten times in the four
weeks we have watched them. In that time, about three
thousand million sperm will have passed from one to the
other. So precise is the man's ability to top up his partner that
if they had doubled their rate of intercourse, or if they had
halved it, it would have made scarcely any difference to the
total number of sperm she would have received.
So men's bodies inject only the number of sperm needed to
top up their partner. How do they do it? To answer this, we
need to understand more about both the architecture of the
male reproductive tract and the mechanics of ejaculation.
28
29SPERM WARS
Imagine that you are a doctor, sitting on a chair, and a naked
man is standing in front of you waiting to be examined. His genitals
are at your eye level. Note his navel, his pubic hair, and the penis
hanging down, slightly askew, in front of the scrotal sac containing
his pair of testes. Hold his flaccid penis in the palm of your right
hand and, if he has one, make sure the foreskin is pushed back.
The rather swollen knob at the end of the penis is called the glans
and, right in front of you, is the vertical, slit-like opening of the
urethra. Through this, the man both urinates and ejaculates. Fix
the line of his urethra in your mind. It runs in a straight line from the
opening slit, back through the penis shaft, into his body and up to
join his bladder. Fix your eyes at the top of his pubic hair and
imagine you can see inside to where the urethra and the bladder
join. Just below this point, the urethra is joined from left and right
by two tubes. These tubes run all the way down to the testes and
each one contains, in effect, a column of sperm. Where these
tubes join the urethra, they are surrounded by a walnut-sized mass
of tissue. This is the prostate gland, which produces the bulk of the
seminal fluid.
So where do these two columns of sperm come from? Even as
the man stands in front of you, his testes are a hive of activity.
Inside, cells are multiplying, growing and finally maturing into
sperm. By the time the sperm are mature and fit to be ejaculated,
they have already been herded into the single column of sperm
from their testis. They are in the sperm tube, but they are still in, or
rather on the surface of, the testis. The sperm tube changes in
character along its length: in the testis the tube is called the
epididymis, and from the testis up to the urethra it is called the vas
deferens. Whereas the vas deferens is more or less straight, the
epididymis is incredibly zigzag and convoluted.
Once the sperm are in the epididymis they are, in effect, simply
queuing up to be ejaculated. Each time the man ejaculates some
of his sperm, the rest shunt forward. As part of the front of each
queue is lost through ejaculation, newly mature sperm join the
back of the queue in the testis. Very approximately, it takes two
months for a sperm to develop and travel from deep
ROUTINE SEX
inside the testis and join this queue. Each sperm will then spend a
further two weeks queuing in the epididymis and up to a further five
days or so in the vas deferens. There is a little queue-jumping as
some young sperm from the back of the queue are shunted ahead
of older sperm at the front, but this need not concern us here.
Now, let's follow what happens to our medical model as he goes
off with his two columns of sperm and has intercourse. While he
was standing in front of you he had no sperm in his urethra, but two
sperm tubes containing in total up to about a thousand million
sperm. Nothing will change when his penis becomes erect, not
even during the early stages of penetration and thrusting.
Eventually, though, sperm will be shunted out of each sperm tube
and into the urethra. A round sphincter that normally prevents urine
leaking out of the bladder also prevents sperm from entering the
bladder. The man's urethra is now loaded, ready to fire.
While loading, the man will feel a pleasurable urgency at the base
of his penis. He will also know that ejaculation is imminent. just
how imminent is, to a limited extent, under his conscious control.
When he finally ejaculates, seminal fluid pours from his prostate
into his urethra. Then muscles contract and the mixture of fluid and
sperm is projected in a series of spurts along the urethra and out
into the woman.
Now, it is not difficult to understand how the man's body controls
the number of sperm he ejaculates. Depending on how many of his
loading muscles work, and how strongly, he can shunt any length
of each of his sperm columns out of their tubes and into his
urethra. Even after loading, his body can change its mind. By
varying the number of spurts, usually from between three and
eight, he can ejaculate a different proportion of the loaded sperm.
Any sperm and seminal fluid left in his urethra after ejaculation can
be flushed out at the next urination.
Of course, somewhere there needs to be a link between the
man's brain, which keeps track of when he last inseminated his
partner, and his genital musculature. Given such a link, it is not
30 31SPERM WARS
difficult to see how his body can top up his partner so accurately.
Nobody suggests, of course, that a man has conscious control
over sperm number. In the midst of thrusting and at the point of
loading his urethra, he does not ask himself consciously, 'Is this a
hundred-million occasion or a four-hundred-million?' His
subconscious mind and body have done this for him. When the
moments to load and ejaculate arrive, his various body parts
respond accordingly. This leaves his conscious mind free to
concentrate on his thrusting — and the woman.
Scene 5
Conception
It is Friday night and twenty-one days have passed since the
beginning of her last period — bleeding that signalled a second!
month without conception. Briefly, the couple had feared: for
their fertility. They were calmed, however, both by the
experiences of friends and by the discovery that a couple must
have unprotected sex for a whole year before they qualify for
medical investigation. With these reassurances, they had put the
month behind them and started afresh. Now, they have just had
sex and are drifting off into post-coital sleep. Tonight, she won't
wake to go to the toilet and her flowback will wet the sheet.
In the past two weeks, their sex life had more or less followed
the routine they had established since giving up contraception.
Sex on Saturday, Sunday and sometimes, as this week, also on
Friday had become the norm. This week, though, had been
slightly different. On Wednesday night, as soon as she had got
into bed after returning from her weekly night out, she had
stroked his body until he awoke and had played with his penis
until he was erect. Then, she had sat astride him and manhandled
his penis into her vagina. He had slipped in easily, because she
was very wet, and from that moment she
ROUTINE SEX
had done all the work. Slowly he had begun to enjoy himself.
They weren't very practised at having sex with her on top, and a
couple of times he had slipped out. She had had to work quite
hard but eventually he had ejaculated. Tonight, they had tried the
same position but this time, for some reason, it just hadn't worked.
Eventually, they had reverted to their usual missionary routine.
As she drifted into sleep, things were happening inside her body
that would change her life for ever. She had ovulated Wilier that
evening and her egg was just reaching the place in her left oviduct
where fertilisation would occur. As it arrived in the fertilisation
zone, three fertile sperm arrived simultaneously.
They began to burrow through the outer layers of the egg. Two of
them were delayed for a few seconds as they bumped into each
other, attempting to penetrate the same point in the egg's defences.
The prize of fertilisation went to the third sperm, which had a
clear run, unhindered by any others. By the time another sperm
arrived only a few seconds later, the egg had put up its barriers
and there was no way in. The egg had been fertilised by the first
sperm to get through. Three months after giving up contraception,
the woman had conceived.
In twenty days' time, an overdue period would prompt her to
carry out a pregnancy test. Two hundred and fifty days after that
she would give birth. The identity of the father, however, would
never be known. For the sperm waiting in her oviduct that Friday
night had in fact been from two different men.
here is one final phase to the odyssey of fertilisation — a
phase that can be critical in a man's and a woman's pursuit of
reproductive success.
In previous scenes, we have followed sperm from their earliest
life in the testes to the moment they are shot into the woman's
vagina. We have watched them attempt to escape from the
seminal pool, migrate through the narrow channels of cervical
mucus and eventually make their way to a rest area in an
32 33
TSPERM WARS
oviduct. There we left them, waiting for the final stage of their
journey.
Sperm may rest in an oviduct for as long as a day and, at any
one time, up to a few thousand may be resting and waiting. One
by one, they wake up and swim further along the oviduct. Their
initial destination is a region in which, if an egg is present,
fertilisation can occur. But usually no egg is present, and the
sperm simply pass through and eventually die.
As a sperm approaches the fertilisation zone, it changes its
behaviour. Its tail starts to beat more vigorously and, once it
arrives, it often swims frantically in circles or figures of eight. At
any one time, the fertilisation zone may contain anything from
one or two to up to a thousand sperm, all looking for the egg that
usually never comes. After a while, they leave the zone, one by
one. As each leaves, its place is taken by a new, fresher arrival
from the rest area. Having left the fertilisation zone, each sperm
then travels the remaining distance up the oviduct until eventually
it swims out into the woman's body cavity — which it can easily
manage because the end of her oviduct gapes open, its opening
surrounded by finger-like projections.
Now let's consider the egg.
A short distance away from the end of each oviduct, suspended
like a relatively huge planet next to a black hole, is an ovary. Tiny
hairs on the inside of the oviduct create a current in the body fluid
so that when an egg is released by an ovary, it is slowly wafted
towards the black hole of the oviduct. Like a waiting hand, the
finger-like projections funnel the egg into the tube. From here, the
egg begins its five-day journey down towards the womb.
To achieve fertilisation, a sperm has to do more than simply
encounter an egg in the fertilisation zone, because the egg arrives
in that zone surrounded by three lines of defence — a fortress that
has to be breached by the sperm before the egg will yield. The
outer line of defence, the cumulus, is a thick layer of shapeless
cells which the egg has brought with it from the ovary. Beneath
the cumulus is another relatively thick, smooth
34
ROUTINE SEX
layer, the zona, which is the outer membrane of the egg itself.
Under the zona is a narrow space which surrounds the final, most
vulnerable barrier, the vitelline membrane.
Using its head, the sperm hacks its way through the cumulus
cells. If successful, and it reaches the zona beneath, it sticks the
side of its head on to the membrane with chemicals. With this
chemical attachment serving as an initial purchase, the sperm
again uses its head to cut a way through, this time employing a
pointed spike that has been exposed at the tip of its head. The
lashing tail provides the force to push the sperm forwards. Finally,
if this sperm is the first to get through the zona, cross the
underlying space and touch the vitelline membrane, it is engulfed
by the egg in a welcoming embrace. Having embraced one sperm,
the egg passes a chemical message across its surface and, within
seconds, becomes impenetrable. If you are a human sperm, there
is no prize for coming second.
The successful sperm sheds its membranes within the egg,
releasing its genetic heart of DNA. This then travels to fuse with
the similar heart of the egg. Fusion of the DNA from sperm and
egg mixes together the genes from father and mother in equal
proportions. A new person has been conceived, with
characteristics that are a subtle mixture of his or her two parents.
We know with certainty the mother of the child in our scene.
After all, the child will spend nine months developing inside her.
But who is the father? As we saw, in those few critical days before
she ovulated the woman had collected sperm from two men — her
partner and her lover. To see what happened, and to work out who
is the father, we need first to go back ten days. We are about to
witness a sperm war.
35CHAPTER THREE
Sperm Wars
SCENE 6
A Chance Affair
The woman was out on her Wednesday night ritual with eight of
her girlfriends. She had been going out like this for over a year.
About a dozen of them were involved, but not everybody went out
every week. Typically, their night centred on lots of drinking and
talking, a meal and sometimes a club. Occasionally, a man or two
would move in and try to prise somebody away from the group.
They expected each other from time to time to talk to, and perhaps
even leave with, a man. Even though most of them had a male
partner at home, the group enjoyed an unspoken sisterly
complicity.
Tonight, it was her turn. Quite by chance, who should walk
into the bar but the man she had met during her last schoolgirl
summer — the one who, for a few months, had been her weekend
sexual partner during her first term as a student. They recognised
each other immediately and spent virtually the whole evening
talking, catching up on events since their last, rather acrimonious,
meeting. She learned that he now worked at the other end of the
country but was in town for a week on business, staying in a
nearby hotel. Now nearly thirty, he was still not living with
anybody, but had a girlfriend — or two.
He still oozed masculinity, promiscuity — and unreliability.
Kudos though there had been in being his girlfriend, she had
SPERM WARS
eventually finished with him on discovering his many and varied
infidelities. At that vulnerable stage in her life she had needed
someone she could rely on. Now, however, meeting him out of
the blue, many of her old feelings returned. All the same, HI the
end of the evening she rejoined her group.
At lunchtime the next day, he turned up at her work and took
her out for a snatched bar lunch. Over lunch, they arranged to
meet for a meal that evening. As it was Thursday and her partner
would be out with his friends, she reasoned there was no need or
point in telling him. As far as she was concerned, the evening
would be totally innocent and therefore not worth mentioning
anyway. Even so, she took her ex-boyfriend to a restaurant some
way out of town where they were unlikely to Be seen.
All through the evening, it was obvious he was expecting them
to end up in bed back at his hotel. He was very attentive and
flirtatious and from time to time would find an excuse to touch
her. But the thought of infidelity never seriously crossed her
mind. She still found him attractive and his touches arousing, but
she also found his expectation of sex irritating, almost offensive.
As a result, she had long cool phases inwards him throughout the
evening. Eventually, he got the message and backed off. On the
return journey to her home they simply exchanged pleasantries.
In the few moments before she got out of his car, they spoke as
if they were never going to meet again. She surprised herself
when a sudden feeling of warmth, nostalgia and maybe guilt
prompted her to kiss him briefly on the cheek. She surprised
herself even more when she kissed him again, this time on the
lips. Somewhat flustered by this momentary surge of passion, she
got quickly out of the car, wished him a good life, and went
inside.
When her partner returned home an hour later, she was in bed
pretending to be asleep. As he fell into a drunken sleep and began
a night of snoring, her thoughts and dreams raced around with the
excitement of the evening. At some unknown
36 37SPERM WARS SPERM WARS
hour of the night she surfaced just enough to realise she had
climaxed in her sleep.
All the next day, at work, she couldn't believe how easy it had
all been. She had spent the evening, albeit quite innocently, with
another man, and absolutely no one had known about it. The
man, their evening, their conversation and their kiss, as well as
memories of their earlier sex life when she was still a teenager,
were at the back of her mind continually as she worked. Her
thoughts kept her in an almost permanent state of subliminal
excitement. Her knickers were damp virtually all day and on one
visit to the toilet she masturbated.
She didn't have sex with her partner that Friday night but she
did both on Saturday and on Sunday. On Saturday night she
more or less insisted that he gave her an orgasm before entering
her. It was rare for her to climax during intercourse itself. She
never expected to and on the occasions when she really wanted
an orgasm she made sure it was during foreplay. On Sunday
morning she had masturbated while in the bath, then appeared
naked in the lounge and seduced her partner into sex on the
floor. During each orgasm over the weekend, even during
foreplay, the fantasy in her mind was not of her partner (it never
was these days!) but of a real or imaginary scene from the past
with her ex-boyfriend.
All weekend, she secretly relished her burst of sexual activity
and excitement. At no point, however, did she ever contemplate
doing anything more dangerous than fantasise about illicit sex.
But on Monday, back at work, her mood began to change. Her
ex-boyfriend was leaving on Thursday and she might never see
him again. An idea began to form in her mind and her
excitement slowly turned to nervousness. Maybe she should see
him just one more time. It would be easy to arrange. Instead of
going out with her friends on Wednesday night, she could spend
the evening with him. All she had to do was pick up the phone, call his
mobile, and arrange it. Easy.
The thought both excited and frightened her, so much so that
all day Monday she did nothing but relish it. On Tuesday
she found the courage to phone just once, but got no answer.
After that, her nerve failed and she didn't try again that day. On
Wednesday morning, her mood changed from fear and guilt to
one of calm confidence. Why shouldn't she see him again? He
was an old friend and this could be her last opportunity. After
all, their previous evening together had been innocent enough —
there was no need to feel guilty or nervous. But maybe there was
no need to tell anyone, either.
At her third attempt, he answered his phone. He was pleased
and surprised to hear from her but was in a hurry and, without
time to discuss arrangements, suggested that she call for him at
his hotel that evening. She agreed, and spent the rest of the day
in a state of high excitement. She told her friends at work that
she had to visit her sister, and so would not be with them at their
weekly get-together. She told her partner, as she left him at
seven o'clock, that she felt like going on to a club and so might
be late. He complained, but not much.
She was nervous as she arrived at the hotel and the first few
minutes of conversation were very awkward. However, even
before they had finished their first drink at the hotel bar, it was
as if they were students again. The last six years apart had never
happened. Tonight, her mood and behaviour were quite different
from the previous Thursday. After another drink she sat with her
knees touching his, and as the conversation flowed touched him
frequently on his leg or arm with her open hand. When he
suggested they eat in the hotel restaurant 'to avoid going out in
the cold', she readily agreed. After eating, he 'just had to go up to
his room' to get a photograph to show her. She went with him
because she had 'always wanted to see what the rooms were like
in this hotel'.
He never did show her the photograph. Within moments of
closing the door they were kissing and removing each other's
clothes. Almost before she could take a breath they were naked
on the floor and he was inside her, ejaculating. She had been
taken aback by his urgency but made no attempt to slow him
down. He did not offer to use a condom or to withdraw, and
38 39SPERM WARS
it never crossed her mind to ask. Her vagina had been wet with
anticipation all day and as she walked into his room it had been
in full flow. Penetration had been quick and easy and ejaculation
had been swift.
When it was over he apologised, saying that his urgency was
because he had never stopped loving her and had been desperate
for her. He promised that if they got off the floor and into bed he
would make it up to her. And he did. For half an hour he
caressed and played with her body with an understanding of her
womanhood that her partner had never shown. After she
climaxed, they dozed for a while in] each other's arms. Then they
began all over again. He still 1 penetrated her early, but this time
his urgency had gone. Thrusting was slow and long. Unusually
for her, she climaxed) during thrusting, just a few seconds before
he ejaculated.
They settled into another post-coital embrace, but their
tranquillity did not last for long. For the first time that night,
guilt and panic began to grow in her mind. It was getting late
Quickly, her fear became all-consuming. She had to get home.
He urged her to stay the night — to phone her partner and give
some excuse for not going home. But she would not hear of it.
She just had to get home. Eventually, she escaped from his bed
on the pretext of going to the toilet. Then she refused to return
and began to get dressed. Conversation became tense and forced.
She even became irritable with him and their parting was an
awkward affair. As she taxied home, her flowback seeped on to
her knickers in a replay of past times. But she did not notice. Her
mind was too full of what she should do when she got home.
Quietly, so as not to wake her partner, she undressed, washed
herself thoroughly, then got into bed. Then she set about waking
and arousing him. When he was erect, even before he was fully
awake, she sat astride him, inserted his penis, and after a while
managed to get him to ejaculate inside her. He dimly registered
that she was very wet but thought no more of it, and
concentrated instead on enjoying an intercourse without effort.
40
SPERM WARS
The next day, her ex-boyfriend left for home. They were never
to see each other again. The day after that she ovulated and
conceived. Over the next three weeks, she and her partner had
sex nearly every other day. By the time she discovered her
pregnancy, her night of infidelity had become a distant memory.
The guilt and fear had all but gone and she could almost believe
it had never happened. She gradually convinced herself that the
baby was in fact her partner's. After all, she'd had sex with him
about sixteen times that month compared with that single night
with her ex-boyfriend.
Nine months later she was to have a daughter. Two years after
that, she and her partner had a son, followed three years later by
another daughter. As the elder daughter grew she came to look
more and more like her mother. She also became noticeably
more attractive, more dynamic and more popular than the two
younger children. However, the differences between them
seemed no greater than between many brothers and sisters.
In the years to come, the woman's partner never once
inspected that at the conception of her first child her body had
contained sperm from another man, as well as from him. Even
she, of course, never knew for certain what happened inside her
body over those few critical days. Neither of them was ever to
know that the tiny sperm that entered her egg to produce her first
daughter was in fact not her partner's but her ex- boyfriend's.
he two scenes (6 and 7) in this short chapter explore first
the promotion and then the process of sperm warfare. In
(act, only one of these scenes involves people — the one we
have just witnessed. Scene 7 is not really a scene at all. As a
description of sperm wars in action, it is the only occasion in this
book in which it was more appropriate to combine scene with
interpretation.
We have just witnessed a textbook scene of infidelity. The
subtleties of behaviour all play their part in influencing the
41
TSPERM WARS
paternity of the woman's first daughter. We should note in
passing the unreliable, promiscuous masculinity of the woman's
ex-boyfriend and that his child showed certain more positive
characteristics than the children the woman had with her partner.
We should also note the number and timing of her orgasms, both
male-induced and via self-stimulation. We will discuss later the
significance of these elements. Here, we concentrate on the
infidelity itself and on the factors which led the ex-boyfriend's
sperm, rather than the partner's, to achieve fertilisation. Clearly,
the outcome had a major impact on the reproductive success of
all three characters in the scene.
We have already mentioned that a woman is slightly more
likely to have routine sex with her partner during the infertile
postovulatory phase of her cycle (Scene 2). The same is not true
for infidelity. A woman is much more likely to have penetrative
sex with a man other than her partner during her fertile phase.
Moreover, she is much less likely to use or insist on the man
using contraception on such occasions.
In order for these patterns for infidelity to be detected
statistically, women must have cycles of mood and behaviour
that promote them. We can see a hint of how this might occur,
not only in the scene we have just witnessed, but also in the first
scene involving this couple. The first month we met them, the
woman did not conceive. She was cool towards her partner
during her fertile period and we suggested that her lack of
conception was a success for her body, not a failure by the
couple. At that time, the only man available to her was her
partner, and her body had decided — for the conscious brain is
not involved here — that it was not yet a good time to give him
the paternity of her first child. To achieve this, it had generated a
feeling of coolness towards him for the duration of her fertile
period.
This month, a chance meeting with her ex-boyfriend meant
that the woman had an alternative potential father for her first
child — an alternative which her body actually preferred. She
had two opportunities to be unfaithful, first on the Thursday,
SPERM WARS
then on the following Wednesday. She took one opportunity,
Mil not the other. The Thursday evening had been instigated by
her ex-boyfriend and the woman was in an infertile phase of her
cycle. Her body found barely any attraction in sex with this man.
Her coolness that evening had kept him at arm's length, even
though he was manifestly hoping for sex. On the Wednesday,
however, her mood was quite different. As she moved into her
fertile phase on the Monday, the idea of seeing her ex-boyfriend
began to appeal to her. Her motivation to do something about it,
however, did not peak until the Wednesday. Unknown to
everyone, including herself, this was the day that insemination
was most likely to lead to conception.
When the Wednesday evening came, her mood and body
language were very different from the previous Thursday. Most
of the leading suggestions still came from the man, but whereas
the week before she had made it clear she was not interested, this
time she readily cooperated. In his bedroom, she cooperated
further to ensure that she obtained his sperm. She accepted
penetration and ejaculation with the minimum of foreplay, and
ignored the question of contraception completely. Later, her
conscious mind would rationalise her behaviour in terms of
being overwhelmed by the excitement and passion of the
moment. In reality it was simply that, two days in advance of
ovulation, her body was eager to collect this man's sperm. The
reason her body wanted a second insemination we shall see later
(Scene 25), but once she had collected his sperm she lost interest
in staying with him. Then, by far the most important thing was
to get back to her partner.
Subconsciously, there were probably two main reasons why
her body engineered such a sudden change of mood towards her
lover. In part, the reasoning will also have been in her conscious
mind, though she will have given herself slightly different
explanations. The underlying strategy her body was pursuing
was that, no matter who fathered the child, the man best suited to
help her raise it was her partner. It was vital to this strategy,
therefore, that any infidelity should not be discovered
42 43SPERM WARS SPERM WARS
Her body generated a fear of discovery and a sense of panic, but
needed to recruit her conscious mind to work out the finer details
of timing and story-telling. The two together seem to work well.
Surveys suggest that one-off infidelities such as this are rarely
discovered, and even longer-term infidelities have only a fiftyfifty chance of discovery. On this occasion, as we have seen, the
woman succeeded in covering her tracks.
There is one further stage in her body's strategy which her
conscious mind is most unlikely to fathom. When she gets home,
she works very hard to have sex with her partner. Consciously,
she will have seen this as helping to avoid detection. If she can
get her partner to inseminate her, any tell-tale damp patch on the
sheets or any smell of semen will not arouse his suspicions.
What her conscious mind will not realise, though, is that having
collected sperm from her ex-boyfriend, her body is now very
keen also to collect sperm from her partner. Her body hall
already decided that, on balance, her ex-boyfriend would make a
better genetic father than her partner. The one thing it doesn't
know is how their ejaculates compare. She wants to have hell
egg fertilised by her ex-boyfriend only if his ejaculate is also the
more fertile and competitive. The way for her to discover this is
to pit one ejaculate against the other. In other words, her body
wants to promote sperm warfare between the two men, and this
is probably her only chance ever to do so.
Once a woman's body contains sperm from two or more
different men, those sperm compete for the prize of fertilising
her egg. But the contest that takes place is not a simple game of
chance, nor is it just a race. It is indeed a war — a war between
two (or more) armies. And it is this warfare between ejaculates,
or the threat of it, that has shaped the sexuality of every man and
woman alive today, as well as the sexuality of just about every
other animal that has ever existed.
Sperm warfare is more common and more important than
most people suppose. A recent study in Britain concluded that 4
per cent of people are conceived via sperm warfare. In other
words, one in every twenty-five owe their existence to the fact
that their genetic
44
father's sperm out-competed the sperm from one or more other
men within the reproductive tract of their mother. If this does
not seem very many, it nevertheless means that since about
1900 every single one of us will have had an ancestor who was
conceived via sperm warfare. Every one of us, therefore, is the
person we are today because one of our recent ancestors
produced an ejaculate competitive enough to win a sperm war.
Most often, because a woman only produces one egg at a
time, sperm warfare can produce only one winner, as in Scene 6.
Occasionally, however, a woman produces two eggs at the same
time and gives birth to fraternal twins. Under such
circumstances, a different outcome of warfare is possible — a
draw. There are several remarkable cases on record — most
obvious when the two rivals in sperm warfare are of different
races — in which fraternal twins have different fathers.
Let us go back to the moment of conception that we
witnessed earlier. Three sperm arrived at the egg
simultaneously. They were all from the woman's lover. If we
move back down her oviduct to the collection of sperm waiting
quietly in the rest area for their turn to swim up the oviduct, we
find that nine out of every ten are also from the lover. The
woman's partner had lost this game of sperm wars in a big way,
even though he had done all he could in preparation. We are
back to routine sex.
So far, we have interpreted a man's interest in routine sex
simply in terms of his attempt to maintain a steady flow of
fertile sperm through a woman's oviduct Routine sex, however,
does more than just top up the partner with fertile sperm: it also
prepares for sperm warfare. Moreover, the level of preparation
depends on the risk of war. In deciding how many sperm to load
and ejaculate during routine sex, the man's body weighs up the
chances that his partner might contain sperm from another man.
His body does this very simply by registering how much time he
has spent with the woman he is about to inseminate since they
last had sex. If they have not had sex for over a week, then he
registers how much time he has spent with her over the past
eight days.
Crude though this strategy might seem, it does work. The less
45SPERM WARS
time a man spends with his partner, the greater the chance of her
infidelity. If he spends more than 80 per cent of his time with
her, there is virtually no chance of her being unfaithful. But if he
is with her for as little as 10 per cent of his time, there is over a
10 per cent chance. In other words, as far as the man's body is
concerned, if he has spent less time with his partner since they
last had sex, there is a greater chance that when he inseminates
her her body will already contain sperm from another man. To
increase his chances of winning the sperm wars that might
follow, he needs to introduce more sperm. And this is just what
he does.
The difference in the number of sperm he will ejaculate,
depending on the circumstances just outlined, is quite large. In
the scene of infidelity we have just witnessed, the woman
returned home on the Wednesday night and had sex with her
partner. In deciding how many sperm to introduce, his sleepy
body will first have registered that it was three days since they
last had sex (Sunday). The average top-up for such a gap is
about three hundred million sperm. His body next registered that
they had been together about 50 per cent of the time since then,
giving an average chance of infidelity. So the average top-up of
about three hundred million is about right, and that's the number
of sperm his body should have loaded and then ejaculated. If the
couple had been in each other's company continuously during
those three days, the risk of her infidelity would have been near
zero and he would have introduced only about a hundred million
sperm. On the other hand, if one or other of them had been away
from early Monday morning to late Wednesday night, the risk of
her infidelity would have been greater and he would have
injected about five hundred million.
For the woman's lover, the situation was quite different. It
was the first time he had inseminated this woman for over six
years. Moreover, even over the last eight days he had spent only
a few hours with her. His body judged, correctly of course, that
her body had a very high chance of containing sperm from
another man, and will have responded by loading and ejaculating
six hundred million. Half an hour later, he injected a further
SPERM WARS
hundred million or so. As far as 'Infidelity Wednesday' is
concerned, sperm wars began with the lover putting a sperm army
into the woman's tract that was twice the size of her partner's.
So the lover had a twofold advantage over the partner from the
very beginning. By the time the war was coming to its climax and
the prize of fertilisation was nearly ready to be claimed, however,
the lover had a ninefold advantage. (Remember that in the rest
area of the woman's oviduct, nine out of every ten sperm waiting
to set off for the fertilisation zone were the lover's.) What had
happened during sperm warfare to shift the odds even further in
the lover's favour? The first step in finding out is to meet and
appreciate the soldiers themselves — the sperm.
The most common sperm in the human ejaculate is, of course,
the magnificent, sleek athletic cell that most people know, with a
head, a mid-piece and a long, slender tail. The head is paddleshaped, oval in outline but flattened and wearing a cap. This cap
is filled with important fluids. Inside the head, densely folded, is
the package of DNA, the genes that a fertile sperm will deliver to
the heart of the egg. The head perches like a lollipop on the short,
stiff mid-piece which is the sperm's powerhouse, the place where
stored energy is mobilised to activate the tail for swimming.
These sleek individuals travel effortlessly through the female's
body fluids, pushed forward by elegant waves whipping in slow
motion down the length of their tail.
Familiar though this image will be to most people, such sperm
comprise only just over half of the total in a normal ejaculate. A
sperm army is a much more motley collection of characters than
most people expect. For example, some sperm have a big head,
others a small one. Yet others, the pin-heads, have a head that is
so small that there is no room to carry the genetic package of
DNA. Some sperm have a round head, some a cigar-shaped one,
some a pear-shaped one, some a dumb-bell shaped one, and some
a head that is so irregular in shape that it defies description. Some
sperm, the real monster troops, have two, three or, very
occasionally, four heads.
The shape of the head is not the only feature to differ. Some
46 47SPERM WARS
sperm have short tails, some have tails coiled like a spring, and
some have two, three or occasionally four tails. Some sperm, the
hunchbacks of the force, have mid-pieces that are bent into a
right-angle. Yet others, like hikers carrying a rucksack, have
bags of cell material on their mid-pieces. On average, only about
60 per cent of the army are the familiar, sleek athletes; the
remainder are this collection of deviants. All, however, have an
important part to play in sperm warfare.
On 'Infidelity Wednesday', it was the performance of the
lover's army as a whole that helped to increase the odds in his
favour, as the sperm war progressed, from 2:1 to 9:1. To find out
how, we need to climb into the woman's body with a micro-scope
and follow the war in detail through all its campaigns. We will
begin at the moment the woman and her lover walk into his hotel
bedroom, undress and begin to have sex on the floor.
SCENE 7
A Sperm War
As the woman and her lover sink to the floor, only moments
away from intercourse, her body already contains sperm. Her
partner inseminated a total of six hundred million during their
routine intercourses the previous weekend. Most were ejected in
her various flowbacks, but even so some are still inside her.
Their ability to influence the outcome of sperm warfare,
however, depends on where they are.
A few ineffectual sperm are at the top of her vagina, carried
there by cervical mucus, which has been dripping out of her
cervix and oozing down her vagina all day in anticipation of this
moment of infidelity. Each drip of mucus carried with it a few of
her partner's sperm. As these sperm were lost from the future
battleground in her cervix, they were partly replaced higher up
by the last handfuls of sperm from her cervical
48
SPERM WARS
crypts. These emerged and entered her mucus channels in a vain
attempt to make good the numbers being lost into her vagina.
However, the numbers being lost were greater than the number of
their replacements, and all day her partner's cervical defences had
been slowly declining.
The sperm lodged in her cervical mucus are not the sleek
types already referred to. Instead, they are sluggardly blockers
sperm whose role is to prevent any later sperm from passing
through to her cervical crypts and womb. Sperm with coiled tails,
a bent mid-piece, a large 'rucksack', a large head, or with two,
three or four heads can block very effectively any of the very
narrow mucus channels in which they lodge. So, too, can two
sperm side by side. As her lover thrusts inside her, however,
relatively few of her mucus channels are still blocked by this
rapidly dwindling collection of her partner's sperm.
These blocking sperm are not her partner's only defence inside
her body. Roaming around in the void of her womb are a few
more of his sperm, though these too are dwindling in numbers.
These sperm look familiar. They are svelte and athletic, but they
are not there to fertilise. These are killer sperm, roaming around
in search of sperm from other men to destroy. Each time a killer
encounters another sperm, it tests the chemicals on the surface of
the other's head. If those chemicals are the same as on its own
head, the killer recognises an ally and moves on to continue its
search. So far, all encounters inside this woman have been with
allies and the killers' deadly services have not been needed. Many
are now beginning to move slowly, and large numbers are dying
of old age. The weakest have been in her womb for three days.
The more active are more recent arrivals from the reservoirs in
her cervical crypts.
The woman's womb is not the only territory stalked by killers.
A few more are scattered along her oviducts. There is even one
swimming solitarily in her body cavity near to her left ovary.
These killer sperm in her oviducts accompany the last handful of
the partner's fertile sperm, the egg-getters. Killer sperm and egggetters look very similar. They are both sleek and athletic
49SPERM WARS
in form but, whereas the killers have average-sized heads, the
heads of the egg-getters are slightly larger. If the woman ovulated
now, her partner would still have a good chance of fertilisation.
But ovulation is still two days away, and war is about to begin.
After very few thrusts, the lover deposits his seminal pool in the
woman's vagina. Her cervix dips into and stays in the pool, and the
vanguard of his army begins to stream into the channels of her
cervical mucus. This army contains about five hundred million
killer sperm, about one million egg-getters, and about a hundred
million blockers. Some are denied passage through mucus
channels by the partner's blocking sperm. So few of these blockers
remain, though, that almost all of the cervical channels are now
clear. The invaders pour through in waves. A few hundred egggetters with support from killers travel straight through the cervix
into the womb, heading immediately for the rest area in the
oviduct. The remainder of the egg-getters, some of me killers and
the youngest of the blockers — a few million in all — head for the
cervical crypts. They pour in, settle down, and await
developments. The remainder of the killers travel more slowly
through the cervix into the womb, leaving behind the much slower
blockers. These latter distribute themselves throughout the mucus
channels, then settle down, many immediately coiling their tails as
if in anticipation of a long wait.
Some of the vanguard of the lover's egg-getters do not make it
to the oviduct. As we have seen, the partner has relatively few
killer sperm still active in the womb, but those that are there do
their best to stem the lover's tide. As soon as a killer from either
man first encounters a sperm from the rival, it is alerted that war
has begun. For an hour or so, the killers from both men swim much
faster than normally, seeking out as many rival sperm as possible.
Their aim is to poison the rival's egg-getters and killers using the
deadly cocktail of fluids in the cap which they each carry on their
heads. They do this via head-to-head combat. First, as we have
seen, they probe with the tips of their heads
SPERM WARS
at every sperm they encounter, comparing its surface chemicals
with their own and checking for similarities and differences. If a
killer finds a sperm from the rival's army, it tries to jab the deadly
tip of its head against the vulnerable side of its opponent's head,
applying a small amount of corrosive poison with each jab.
Having jabbed several times it moves on, leaving the other sperm
to die.
A single killer sperm carries enough poison to kill many sperm
from the rival army, but gradually its cap runs out of chemicals,
for it has no reserves of energy to make any more. In a last-ditch
attempt to kill just one more sperm, it tries to stick its head to a
rival's and apply the last drops of its lethal fluids. As the war
progresses, there is a gradual increase in these pairs of dead and
dying sperm, joined at the head in a deadly embrace.
In this initial skirmish, one or two of the partner's killers do
their job and some of the lover's egg-getters and killers die from
head-to-head combat, their heads coated in the poison. Any initial
success of the partner's sperm, though, is short-lived. In their turn,
they are found by the invading bands of killers from the lover
which accompany his egg-getters. In a frenzy of kamikaze
mayhem, killer sperm from both sides attempt In annihilate each
other's troops. Outnumbered by at least a thousand to one,
however, the last remaining sperm from the partner are soon
killed.
The battlefront now moves into the oviducts, where the killing
continues. With only a few losses of their own, the lover's sperm
systematically wipe out the partner's last remaining egg-getters
and killers. By the time the woman and her lover have sex again,
an hour later, the first battle is over and none of the partner's
sperm remain alive inside her. Actually, the role of the second
insemination in this particular sperm war is more complicated
than it seems — but here that discussion would be a distraction.
So far, our war has been so one-sided that it has been little
more than a brushing aside. The main battle is still to come. It
begins when the woman gets home and her body urges her
50 51SPERM WARS SPERM WARS
to sit astride her partner, push his penis into her vagina, and
stimulate him to ejaculate. By doing so, she has staged a real war.
Nevertheless, even though her partner now enters a fresh army of
three hundred million sperm into the arena, the contest is still going
to be one-sided.
As soon as the newly introduced sperm from the partner attempt
to leave the seminal pool, they encounter problems. The channels of
the woman's cervical mucus are nearly all blocked, not only with
sperm from the lover, but also with white blood cells from the
woman herself. The huge number of the lover's sperm and the
matching number of white blood cells are doing their job almost
perfectly, and the partner's sperm are much more hindered in leaving
the seminal pool than were the lover's, a couple of hours earlier.
Queues of the partner's sperm develop in the blocked channels,
producing tailbacks all the way to the seminal pool. As a result, only
a small proportion of the partner's army manages to escape the pool
before the woman ejects her flowback.
Even those sperm which do escape the pool and find a clear
channel are not yet out of trouble. The small vanguard of egg-getters
and killers which head straight into the womb find themselves
having to run the gauntlet of hordes of the lover's killers. Inevitably,
one or two get through without being poisoned, but only to run into
further problems as they then try to leave the womb. The entrance
into each oviduct is narrow, only just large enough to allow easy
passage to a descending egg. Moreover, both oviduct entrances are
blocked by lover's sperm and patrolled by killers, and many of the
partner's sperm are killed as they try to push through. Even those
few that do escape and eventually arrive safely in the oviduct rest
area are still at risk to the lover's killers, which patrol the whole
area.
Lower down in the woman's tract, in her cervix, many of her
partner's sperm are trying to enter her cervical crypts. But the crypt
entrances too are patrolled by killers and, in any case, inside they
are virtually full of the lover's sperm. Just occasionally, some of the
partner's sperm stumble across a
channel leading to an empty crypt, but the majority get stranded in
the mucus where they fall prey to the combined forces of the
lover's sperm and the woman's white blood cells.
Clearly, the Wednesday encounter in this war has gone very
much in favour of the lover, and nothing much happens over be
next two days to redress the balance. As the woman goes about as
normal on Thursday and Friday, the population of blocking sperm
from both men in her cervical mucus slowly declines. Some drip
into her vagina, carried by mucus. Others are mopped up by
rearguard white blood cells. Even when some of these blockers are
replaced higher up in her cervix with sperm from the cervical
crypts, the new recruits fail to make good the loss and the blockers
dwindle. The killer sperm in her womb, after an initial decline
from battle losses, actually build up in numbers on Thursday with
a fresh recruitment from the cervical crypts. Then the killers also
begin to decline in number. A steady flow of egg-getters from both
men (but mainly the lover) leave the crypts, heading for the rest
areas in the oviducts. En route, they have to run the gauntlet of
rival killer sperm in the womb, and most of the partner's egggetters fail because these killers are almost all from the lover. By
Friday night, with only hours now to go to ovulation, the partner's
egg-getters in the oviducts are outnumbered by about one hundred
to one.
When the woman and her partner have sex on the Friday night,
there is only one more hour to ovulation. Now, the partner's sperm
have a much easier passage through the cervical mucus because
the number of blockers is much reduced. Although most of his
sperm head for the now half-empty cervical crypts, a vanguard of
egg-getters and killers head straight for the oviducts. Many are
killed or slowed down in the womb by the lover's patrolling killers,
but enough get through to reduce the odds in the oviducts from a
hundred to one to about ten to one. It is at this point that the
woman produces an egg from one of her ovaries and a chemical
signal passes down the adjacent oviduct. This signal activates
hundreds of the sperm in the rest area, and a wave
52 53SPERM WARS
of sperm begin to make their way up the oviduct towards the
fertilisation zone. It is now a race, or rather an obstacle race because
there are still killers in the oviduct, mainly from the lover. The
partner's sperm, particularly those few which have just arrived straight
from the insemination, are actually fastball than the lover's - if all else
were equal, the partner could still win the prize of fertilisation.
But all else is not equal. One after another, the partner's egg-getters
run into the lover's killer sperm. As the egg reaches the zone of
fertilisation in the oviduct and the first sperm arrive, the odds against the
partner have reduced to five to one, but that is not enough. The first
three sperm to arrive are all from the lover, and one of these claims the
prize. An hour later, with the partner's fresh sperm now overwhelming
the lover's at all points in the woman's tract, the odds in the oviducts
swing heavily in the partner's favour. But it is too late. The lover has
made it and the woman's daughter, to be born in nine months' time, will
not have been sired by the man she will call her father. But nobody will
ever know.
CHAPTER FOUR
Counting the Cost
SCENE 8
Doesn't He Look like His Father?
As the man drifted back into consciousness, he painfully turned over
his left hand which had been resting, palm down, on the bed. His
partner reached out and placed her hand in his, distressed by the
coolness of his skin. As their eyes met, she shook her head, answering
his mute question.
The man knew that death wasn't far away, but he couldn't die yet.
He had set himself one last task and had to live just that little bit
longer. Despite the drugs and the pain, panic rose within him that he
might fail and die too soon. His son was on his way, flying from the
other side of the world, and the man desperately wanted to see him just
one more time. Nothing else would make his last moments peaceful.
His eyes closed and he drifted off once again into semiconsciousness. Scenes from the past opened and closed so vividly he
could swear he was actually there. He walked into the room where he
met his lifelong partner and saw her for the very first time. He saw the
blood and water as his son shot that last short distance out into the
world. The midwife picked the baby up, identified his boyhood, and in
the next breath remarked how much he looked like his father. Then he
was wrapped and placed in his father's arms, his tiny, wizened face
pointing upwards, bottom lip quivering as he sucked at a
54 55SPERM WARS
non-existent nipple. It was the most emotional moment of the man's
life, his own flesh and blood there in his arms.
The man opened his eyes again. Still all he could see was his
partner. After their son had been born, she had never really wanted
any more children, but he hadn't minded. Just having the one child
meant that they had never needed to stint on their son's comfort,
development and education. At the same time, they had found it
relatively easy to become modestly wealthy. Their investment of
time and money had been more than repaid by their son's successes.
Three times, as his son was growing up, the man was almost
tempted into infidelity. But each time, at the last moment, he had
resisted for fear it would break up his home. He would have been
sad to lose his partner, but he would have been heartbroken to lose
his son. The two of them had always been close. They had shared all
of those things that a father and son can share, even through the
boy's difficult adolescence. He relived the pride he had felt at seeing
him graduate, then watched once more as his career went from
strength to strength. He met again the succession of pretty girls who
clamoured for his attention, and the beauty who was to become like a
daughter to him. He remembered the surges of grand-paternalism as,
one by one, they had given him five grandchildren.
As real as if it were actually happening, he felt himself lift the
photograph which was now by his hospital bedside but which for
years had had pride of place in his lounge. After his son's
emigration, prompted by a career move apparently too lucrative to
refuse, the picture had taken on a special significance. It was of his
dynasty, as he called it; a professional photograph of himself, his
son and the five grandchildren. As he never tired of saying, the
picture showed his contribution to the world and to future
generations, a contribution more lasting than any work of art. His
son and his grandchildren had already inherited his genes. Now,
very soon, they would inherit a large part of his wealth.
His heart skipped a beat as he thought he saw a young man
COUNTING THE COST
come into the room. He was sure it was his son, and he looked so
well, so successful — and so strangely young. The man smiled. He
had done it. He had hung on just long enough.
His partner knew he was dead. She had felt his hand growing
colder and colder. Now he was gone. She thought she had used up all
her tears, but more came. After a while, she called for a nurse; then,
after a few more moments of contemplation, left the room to wait for
her son. He finally arrived two hours later. After she had broken the
news to him, the pair of them went in and stood over the man's body,
now totally cold. The woman tried to console her son by telling him
that in the man's last hours, during his few moments of
consciousness, he had spoken of nothing else but of him and his
family.
While openly weeping, her son cursed the airport delays and
heavy traffic that had made him too late. Then, in an outburst he
would later regret, he turned on his mother and swore at her. He
cursed her infidelity and lamented the day that she had saddled him
with her secret. For ten long years she had made him keep up the
pretence until, in the end, the burden had become too much and he
had felt driven to emigrate. But most of all, he cursed her for making
him hate himself today. During the long flight home, a single thought
had plagued his mind. Why am I bothering? — he's not even my real
father.
n many occasions in this book, we encounter people who
enhance their reproductive success via infidelity. Such
behaviour, however, is only advantageous if the person concerned
manages to gain the benefits of infidelity without incurring its even
greater costs.
This chapter is concerned with the potential costs of being
unfaithful. It consists of Scenes 8 to 11, each of which explores one
or more of the costs and dangers of infidelity. Some of these dangers
are experienced by the person who is being unfaithful; some by their
partner. In this first scene, we examine
56
57
OSPERM WARS
the reproductive repercussions for a man of being unknowingly tricked
into raising another man's child.
The comments that people make when they are first confronted by a
new-born baby show a surprising preoccupation with seeking a
resemblance between the baby and the presumed father. It is not known
how often such comments and comparisons are accurate. In Scene 8 the
midwife was wrong, but the man would have found it reassuring none
the less. But, as life turned out, it might have been better if he hadn't —
he might have been more likely to retrieve his situation, reproductively.
In his generation's cruel competition to pass on its genes, the dying
man was a reproductive failure. For him there were no descendants; no
dynasty. He had been outmaneuvered in life's mating game by his
partner and a man he never even knew — the man who was the real,
genetic, father of his 'son'. Between them, the two had tricked him into
dedicating all of his reproductive effort into raising a child who wasn't
his, just like the small bird that is tricked into raising a monstrous
cuckoo chick.
Had he not been duped in this way, there was in principle nothing
wrong with his strategy of having just one child. Recent studies have
shown that, all else being equal, increasing one's wealth and investing
more into each child can increase reproductive success just as much as
having more children. It does so because each child then has a greater
chance of survival, grows to be healthier and wealthier, and so becomes
more likely to attract the opposite sex. Eventually, such a child should
produce more grandchildren or great-grandchildren than a child who
received less investment from his or her parents.
Sons, in particular, make good investments (Scene 18). Wealthier,
healthier sons have more opportunity to inseminate girls before they
choose a long-term partner, are more likely to obtain an attractive,
fertile and faithful partner, and are more likely to have the opportunity
for infidelity. Even apart from the grandchildren such a son might
produce through his long-term relationships, he is also more likely to
produce 'satellite' grandchildren via other women, often in the process
COUNTING THE COST
tricking other men into raising his children as if they were their
own.
The greatest reproductive success is achieved by people who
strike the best balance between the pursuit of wealth and status and
the production of children. This principle applies just as much to an
African cattle-herder as it does to a Western industrialist. It also
applies to other animals. A male bird, for instance, has to strike a
balance between gaining a better territory and feeding its young on
the one hand, and finding opportunities to mate on the other. The
best balance, of course, can be elusive. Spend so long accumulating
resources to invest that you never actually find time to reproduce,
and your strategy will fail. Spend all your time having children and
none accumulating resources, and your strategy again fails. Your
children may die of malnutrition or become so unhealthy and
disease-ridden that they become unattractive or infertile.
The single-child strategy, which is the ultimate in investment,
can be successful as we have seen — but it can also fail. Moreover,
when it does fail, it does so spectacularly. If that child dies through
accident or disease or is infertile through some misfortune of
genetics or infection, the single-child strategy is a total failure. Or,
if your situation is like that of the man in Scene 8, the single-child
strategy is again a total failure.
For the woman in the scene, however, the strategy worked
wonderfully. She produced a son who survived and avoided major
diseases. Moreover, through his receipt and use of the higher-thanaverage family wealth, he was able to achieve a status in terms of
health and wealth that made him a popular target for attractive and
fertile young girls (Scene 18). For all his mother knew, her son
might have produced children with some of these other women. He
might even have tricked other men in the same way that his genetic
father had tricked the man who had just died. Even apart from such
potential satellite children, her son had successfully produced five
children with his long-term partner. Had the woman had more than
the one child, the reduced investment in each could have led to her
58 59SPERM WARS COUNTING THE COST
having fewer grandchildren. As events turned out, her strategy was a
good one.
The strategy also worked well for the genetic father. Not only did he
enjoy the same reproductive benefits through his son as did the woman,
but he undoubtedly enjoyed further reproductive success with his own
long-term partner. Biologically, his success contrasts with the failure of
the man who raised his, the genetic father's, child as if it were his own.
Having been deceived early on in his reproductive life, the latter had
several opportunities to retrieve the situation but, as events turned out,
he responded disadvantageously. He could have been more persuasive
in changing his partner's mind about not having more children, but he
wasn't. He could have taken the opportunities for infidelity that
presented themselves, but he didn't. He could even have left his partner
and tried a long-term relationship with another woman who would have
given him children, but he didn't. For him, the dangerous strategy of
having only one child was a disaster.
Had the child he was raising been his own, his character and his
responses to the challenge of child-rearing would have been
advantageous. The couple would both have reaped the rewards of a
successful son. But because the child was not his own, biologically his
genetic package of characteristics was a failure. With all the cruelty that
is natural selection, his genes were weeded out, never to be passed on to
future generations.
The experience of the dying man in Scene 8 is by no means rare.
World wide, it has been calculated from studies of blood groups that
about 10 per cent of children are in fact not sired by the man who thinks
he is their father. This is also the level found in industrial Western
societies (see Scene 18 for further details). There is a real need for an
extensive study using modern techniques such as DNA fingerprinting.
So far, the nearest thing to such a study comes from the paternity tests
carried out by child support agencies. They are responding to absent
'fathers' who demand such tests in an attempt to avoid or delay the
enforced financial support of an ex-partner. Internationally, child
support agencies are reporting a non-paternity rate of about 15 per cent.
All figures for non-paternity are of the proportion of children actually
born. The non-paternity level for children conceived will be even
higher. This is because a woman is more likely to abort a child
conceived via a man other than her long-term partner. Almost certainly
this happens primarily when her partner either knows or has a good
chance of finding out that he is not the real father. The abortion then
represents an attempt by the woman to avoid the costs of infidelity
discussed in Scenes 9 and 11.
Although properly controlled DNA fingerprinting studies have not been
carried out on humans, they have been carried out on a wide range of
apparently monogamous birds. The results suggest a roughly 30 per
cent incidence of males raising other males' offspring, comparable with
but slightly higher than the level in humans. So it would seem that the
average male bird has even less reason to be reassured by a passing
resemblance to its offspring than has the average man.
SCENE 9
Making Mistakes
The woman turned the corner, then stopped under a street lamp to
check that her keys were in her bag. A few minutes more would see her
home, and her spirits were sinking fast. Although the night was cold,
she paused for a while under the light — anything to delay the moment
of arrival.
She had spent the evening at her sister's, about fifteen minutes' walk
away, seeking peace and asking advice. Her sister was in no doubt.
'Take the children and go,' she had said. 'Stay with mother — she'll
have you while you sort things out.'
60 61SPERM WARS COUNTING THE COST
Still standing under the light, the woman fingered her cheek bone.
The tenderness had nearly gone, but she knew it wouldn't be long
before the bruises were back again. She took a deep breath, braced
herself, and walked the remaining distance to her front gate. She had
hoped he would be in bed by now, but as she went up the path she
could see that the sitting-room light was still on.
Her partner didn't look up when she walked into the room, his gaze
staying firmly fixed on the TV screen. There was a can of beer in his
hand, and a further eight crushed empty ones littering the floor. She
recognised the atmosphere only too well, and knew she had to be
careful. For a while she busied herself with minutiae, tidying up the
debris of his evening at home with their two children. In the end, she
could stand the silence no longer and asked, as calmly as she could
manage, if the children had gone to bed without fuss. Without looking
at her, he spat his reply. Her children had gone to bed fine. He didn't
have any.
She knew better than to contradict him. Both of the children were
in fact his, but recently he had decided they were not. Since then, he
hadn't missed an opportunity to voice his new-found doubts — to her,
to the children, to the neighbours, in fact to anybody who would
listen. She sighed more aggressively than she intended, then said that
if he was going to start that again, she was going to bed.
'Come here,' he ordered.
She hesitated, a familiar fear rising inside her.
'Come here,' he repeated, even more forcefully, still not looking at
her.
She knew she had no choice. Running away only made him worse.
She walked over and stood in front of him. He remained seated.
'You've been with him again,' he said flatly, staring through her
stomach at the television behind.
She said she hadn't been with anybody, only her sister. There
wasn't anybody. He should phone her sister if he didn't believe
62
her. He didn't need to phone her sister, he said — he knew. She told
him he was drunk and crazy, that there was no talking to him any
more, and that she was going to bed. Now, for the first time since her
return, he looked up at her face and told her to stay where she was.
She saw the wild look that always came into his eyes before he
attacked her. As he demanded to know who she had been with, fear
gripped her. He said he knew she was screwing around. She had
always screwed around. He just wanted to know who it was, so that
this time he could kill him.
As he staggered to his feet, she backed away, pleading with him not
to hurt her again. He demanded even more loudly to know who she
was screwing. She half cried, half shouted that there was nobody.
Ignoring her, he yelled back that whoever it was he wasn't going to
have a free ride. He told her to take off her clothes and accept what
was coming to her. She whimpered 'No', but it was no good. His fists
and hands were everywhere as he manhandled her to the floor. As
new bruises were added to old, the pain was familiar but more intense
— so intense that it was almost a relief when he stopped beating her
to tear off her underwear. Then he unzipped his trousers and entered
her, thrusting vigorously and painfully.
Almost as soon as he had inseminated her he stood up, telling her
that if he ever found out who she was seeing he was a dead man. If
she was lucky, he might let her live. Now, he was going to bed and
she could sleep on the floor where she belonged.
The next day she packed her and her children's belongings and
walked out, taking her sister's advice and moving in with their
mother. Over the next few weeks, she considered legal action for
violence and rape but eventually decided that her best option was to
have nothing further to do with him. She never saw him again, and he
never tried to contact her or the children. Later, she heard that only
two weeks after she had moved out, a girl of about nineteen had
moved in. A year later, he was dead, murdered by the nineteen-yearold's father.
The woman stayed with her mother far longer than either
63SPERM WARS COUNTING THE COST
of them wanted. Eventually, she moved in with the first man who
was prepared to take on her and her children. Having been deserted
by his previous partner after a barren relationship, he had no children
himself. At first, he was a good father to hers. But no sooner had she
given birth to his daughter than his attitude changed. He began to hit
her son and, unknown to her, to sexually abuse her elder daughter,
who became morose and rebellious. After a particularly savage
beating from his stepfather, her son left home to live with his
grandmother until he could support himself. Many years later he was
diagnosed as infertile, the result, he always maintained, of that final
beating. Her elder daughter, once in her early teens, simply ran away
and never again re-established contact.
The woman never forgave her new partner for driving away her
older children, but rather than repeat the mistakes of the past she
stayed with him. Once her son and elder daughter had left, her
relationship with him seemed to improve. They had another child
and managed to raise their family without too many problems.
here are pros and cons to both fidelity and infidelity. From the
viewpoint of reproductive success, neither is inevitably
advantageous or disadvantageous. What is always disadvantageous
is making mistakes. Choosing an unsuitable partner from among
those available is one mistake. Another is to misjudge a situation and
be unfaithful when it would be better to be faithful — and to be
faithful when it would be better to be unfaithful. Yet another is to be
under- or over-zealous in attempting to prevent a partner from being
unfaithful. The people who do best in life's generation game are
those who judge their situation correctly and then respond
appropriately. A man has a lot to lose from his partner's infidelity.
First, he may be tricked into devoting a lifetime of wealth and effort
into raising another man's child (Scene 8). Secondly, he is at greater
risk to sexually transmitted diseases, because his partner is at
greater risk. Thirdly, he risks being deserted by his partner if she
judges the other man to be a better prospect — in which case, she
may either take their children with her or leave them behind.
Whichever she does, his reproductive success may suffer.
If she takes his children, they may be raised by a stepfather,
which could be reproductively costly. Studies of many different
cultures around the world have all shown that children are much
more likely to be abused or even killed by a stepfather than by their
genetic father. But if his ex-partner tries to raise their children on
her own, this too can be costly. In at least some societies, the
children in single-parent families have a higher mortality risk. The
same risk exists if his partner leaves their children for him to raise
single-handedly. Even if he manages to attract another partner, he
still risks having them abused or murdered — this time by their
stepmother.
Humans aren't the only animals known to behave more
aggressively towards their stepchildren. Male lions provide a good
example. Lion prides contain two or three males and up to eight
females and their young. Wandering over the savannah are bachelor
groups of two or three males, each group looking for a pride from
which they can oust the current males. If they succeed, the first
thing they do is kill the cubs, the pride's legacy from the previous
males. The females are brought into heat by the loss of their young,
giving the new males an early chance to sire their own offspring.
Some monkeys that live in harem groups — one male with
several females — behave in the same way. if the harem-owner is
driven out, the new male kills the previous male's offspring. Even
monkeys that live in much larger groups, consisting of many males
and females, show similar behaviour. More often than not, a male
acts aggressively towards young which cannot be his. On occasion,
however, he may do the exact opposite and go out of his way to help
a female look after such young. But this is not the act of selflessness
it might seem — it is instead a ploy to gain sexual access. Once the
female produces a baby that could be the male's, he behaves more
aggressively towards
64 65
TSPERM WARS COUNTING THE COST
her older offspring. Note the similarity of such behaviour to that
shown in Scene 9 by the woman's second partner.
There are two ways in which a man may try to reduce the chances
of his partner's infidelity. Crudely, these masquerade as
possessiveness and jealousy. As noted in Scene 6, on the one hand he
can spend so much time with his partner that she has very little
opportunity to be unfaithful. On the other, he can threaten her with
undesirable consequences if she is unfaithful. His two main threats
are first, desertion, and secondly, violence — towards her, her lover,
or both. The man in Scene 9 used violence, and carried it to excess.
Such behaviour is not uncommon.
Infidelity and, just as potently, the suspicion of infidelity are two
of the main causes of domestic violence. They are given as the
reason for over half of reported cases of the abuse and murder of a
partner. In this, humans are for once relatively unusual. Studies of
other animals, mainly birds, have shown that males rarely respond to
a partner's infidelity with aggression, though they may behave
aggressively towards the other male. Monkeys and apes are a little
more similar to people. Even so, they are still less predictable than
humans in showing aggression towards an unfaithful partner.
Why humans should show more aggression than other animals in
such circumstances is unclear. One possibility derives from the
differences in size and strength between men and women. In most
animals, there is little such difference between the sexes. Potential
victims can usually give as good as they get. In humans, however,
men do have a considerable physical advantage over women, and
most domestic violence is perpetuated by men on women, rather than
vice versa. This physical difference gives men more potential than
the males of other species to be violent to their female partners.
Measured aggression, or its threat, may play an important part in
preventing a partner's infidelity. But if it is misjudged, either in
timing or in vigour, the reproductive costs may greatly outweigh the
reproductive benefits. This is because there are
at least three potential disadvantages to behaving aggressively
towards one's sexual partner. First, as long as a male (or a female)
needs the partner's cooperation in having and raising children, then
that partner's continuing health and fertility are essential. Violence,
and any damage it may cause the partner, are therefore
disadvantageous to the aggressor as well as to the victim. Secondly,
there is the danger of such vigorous retaliation on the part of the
victim that it is the aggressor who eventually ends up the more
damaged. Finally, other individuals with the victim's interests at
heart, such as parents, siblings or potential partners, may also offer a
vigorous defence, as the violent man in Scene 9 found to his cost.
This man showed a level of aggression towards his partner unusual
among animals. His urge to inseminate her on suspecting infidelity,
though, is less unusual, and has its counterpart behaviour among
many other species. Male birds, for example, on seeing their partner
having sex with another male, fly straight at that male and knock him
off. They then immediately inseminate the female. Male rats and
monkeys respond similarly. After inseminating his partner, a male rat
or monkey would normally wait a while before doing so again.
However, if he sees her mating with another male, he re-inseminates
her immediately. Even if they have simply been apart for longer than
usual, he is more likely to inseminate her when they next meet.
Such rapid re-insemination is an important strategy for success in
sperm warfare (Scene 21). If the second male waits too long, more of
the first male's sperm have time to leave the seminal pool. In
addition, the first male's army has the chance to distribute itself
throughout the female's tract in an optimum way — blocking
cervical channels, filling cervical crypts, and organising the next few
days' passage of killers and egg-getters. On the other hand, if the
second male can inseminate the female quickly enough, his own
army is there in time to compete for prime positions in the female.
Studies on rats have shown that virtually every second counts. The
longer the second male waits before inseminating the female,
66 67SPERM WARS COUNTING THE COST
the more pups in the litter will be sired by the first male. Speed is
everything.
It is for this reason that rats, monkeys — and men — become
sexually excited by the sight of another couple having intercourse.
The male's penis becomes erect and he may even load his urethra
with sperm. Along with almost all other aspects of human sexuality,
the appeal of hard-core pornography owes its existence to behaviour
shaped for success in sperm warfare.
Men seek to avoid the costs of their partner's infidelity by being
vigilant for signs, minimising opportunities, and threatening
desertion or retaliation. If signs of infidelity are detected, then
guarding and threats are escalated. Only if infidelity actually occurs,
however, are the threats usually carried out. Even then, a man may
decide that his long-term prospects for reproduction are still better if
he stays with his current partner than with anyone else — in which
case, the threats are curtailed.
In Scene 9, separation was costly to both the man and the woman.
Their son, at least, may have suffered reproductively as a direct
consequence of the separation. The daughter, too, may have done so,
though her fate is unknown.
Had the violent man actually been correct in claiming that neither
child was his and that the woman was being unfaithful, his extreme
behaviour might still have been advantageous. Starting again with a
new and younger partner could have been a better strategy than
staying with an unfaithful older partner. But he was wrong and, as it
happened, his misjudged violence reduced his reproductive success
in two ways: first, via the two children he had sired; secondly, by
leading to his early death it robbed him of the chance of producing
further children.
Although deserting her first partner was costly to the woman
through its effect on her children, she probably made the best of a
bad job — in so far as her reproductive survival was concerned,
anyway. Had she stayed with him any longer, his violence could
have been so physically damaging that she might have been unable
to have more children. He might even have turned on her children,
acting on his mistaken conclusion that
he was not their father — in which case, their prospects would have
been no better or worse with their real father than with a stepfather.
Given her situation, the woman was always going to be in danger of
achieving few or no grandchildren via her first family. However, by
leaving her violent partner when she did, she at least managed to
produce a second family, this time with every chance of having
grandchildren.
SCENE 10
Licking Infidelity
In the first few moments after it was over, they felt awkward. Having
picnicked in the sun in a secluded hay-field, they had been carried by
sexual excitement to the brink of infidelity. But she had resisted and
in the end, with her encouragement, he had simply ejaculated on to
the grass. Now, as passion and frustration subsided, so did the
awkwardness. She promised there would be other occasions and
better moments. Soon they began to relax.
They stayed in the field for another half-hour, him stretched out in
the sun, her sitting in the shade and occasionally talking. Reluctantly,
they eventually packed up and drove back to their home town. He
dropped her in the car park at work, and then they drove home
separately to their respective partners.
As soon as the man walked through his front door and exchanged
greetings, he sensed a strangeness in his partner's mood. The phone
rang, but when he answered the caller hung up. Over dinner, his
partner showed no interest in his day. He told her where his business
had taken him and who had gone with him, but got no reaction. All
evening, she busied herself, spending scarcely any time with him. On
the few occasions they spoke, she hardly looked at him. When asked
how her day had been, she shrugged and said it had been normal.
68 69SPERM WARS COUNTING THE COST
She had taken the children to and from school and done the shopping;
otherwise she had been in all day. The highlight had been an hour's
sunbathing early in the afternoon. Then, for no apparent reason, she
volunteered the information that the bed had needed changing and
she had washed the sheets. At the end of the evening, as they went
upstairs, she complained of how hot the day had been and said she
felt like a long bath.
While his partner bathed, the man lay naked on their bed, enjoying
the humid heat of the summer night. He thought of the other woman,
their picnic, his near-infidelity, and her promise of other occasions
and better moments. He became aroused. When his partner came into
the room he was visibly ready for sex, but she ignored him and
busied herself tidying clothes. Usually, she would walk around naked
after a late-night bath, but tonight she was wearing her bath robe. She
also switched off the light before undressing and getting into bed, but
she probably needn't have worried. The marks on her back were
nowhere near as obvious as she imagined.
When he began his sexual overtures, she complained of her
tiredness. But he was determined not to be denied a second time that
day. For a moment she stiffened and held his head as he worked with
his lips down from her breasts to her navel. When he reached her
pubic hair, she complained again that she really didn't feel like sex.
He told her to relax and offered to lick her in just the way she liked.
Tonight, she said, she didn't feel like that either. But it was too late.
His head was already between her legs.
He nuzzled her pubic hair, which was sweet-smelling and still
slightly damp from her bath. So too were her thighs, but when he
began to part her vulval lips with his tongue she galvanised into
action, moved down the bed, and began to kiss his face. With hardly
any further foreplay she took hold of his penis and guided him into
position. He thought it was too soon but, inside, she was surprisingly
wet. Intercourse was long. She didn't climax, but he did.
On the other side of town, the man's near-mistress from
the hay-field was also having problems with her partner. Once their
children were in bed the pair had sat on the settee wearing only their
dressing-gowns, supposedly relaxing before going to bed. They each
had a cat curled up on their lap. The man had been irritable all
evening, and she knew why. He was not happy that she had been on a
business trip all day with another man. Every so often since they had
eaten he had tried to ask about her day, but the children and their
evening routine had prevented any sensible conversation. Now, quiet
at last, he sought reassurance.
He asked how she had got on with the other man, commenting that
a whole day was a long time to be in somebody's company if you
didn't know them very well. She replied that it had been OK, said
truthfully that they had talked mainly about work on the way down,
then lied that she had slept most of the way back. He complained that
they should have gone by train, disliking the idea of their having been
alone in the privacy of a car. The woman shrugged, saying she had
had no choice. The man had wanted to drive, and he was the boss.
Then, in an inspired moment, she said she was glad they had driven.
It meant they could open the windows. It had been so hot — and the
man had smelled really bad all day.
There was a pause, so she pushed home the advantage gained from
her lie. She complained that the man had really annoyed her over
lunch. He had seemed to disapprove of everything she liked and
believed in. At times, it had been really difficult not to tell him what
she thought of him. Her partner relaxed a little, somewhat reassured
by her lies.
Suddenly, she had an idea. Gently pushing the cat off her lap, she
swivelled round towards her partner and placed her hand partly on
his thigh and partly on the cat still on his lap. Making up the story as
she went along, she told him of a dream she had had while dozing in
the car on the way back. As she talked, she stroked the cat on his lap,
apparently accidentally rubbing her partner's penis under his
dressing-gown with the back of her hand. In graphic detail, she
described how, in the
70 71SPERM WARS COUNTING THE COST
dream, the cat now on his lap had been giving her oral sex. Its tongue
had been rough, but gentle. She had got really excited and nearly
come, feeling embarrassed when she woke in case the driver had
noticed her flush. Now with her partner's full attention, she continued
that the thought of oral sex had been in her mind ever since.
Complaining that it was a long time since he had obliged her, she
urged him to do so now.
As usual, she got her own way. She didn't climax from his licking,
but pretended that she did. Then, with the charade over, she let him
have intercourse.
umans are not, of course, the only animals to indulge in oral
sex. Most male mammals, from rats and dogs to elephants and
monkeys, nuzzle, smell and lick the female's vulva during foreplay.
Monkeys also touch a female's genitals, sometimes inserting their
fingers in to her vagina, then smelling and licking them on
withdrawal. What all these males are doing is collecting information.
They are seeking the answer to three questions. Is the female healthy?
Is she fertile? And has she recently had sex with another male? A man
is doing exactly the same — and the information he collects can be a
big help in his pursuit of reproductive success.
If a woman's secretions smell or taste particularly unpleasant, the
male may lose interest in penetration altogether. The smell may
indicate disease. Such information is most useful when a man is
contemplating sex with a new woman. And because diseases can
come and go, it is also worth a man testing the health of even a longterm partner's secretions from time to time.
In many mammals, the smell of the female's secretions is clearly
different and more pleasant to males during her fertile phase. In
women, though, and in other mammals which hide their fertile phase,
the change in smell during the cycle is much less apparent. In one
experiment in the USA, a group of volunteer women each wore a
tampon overnight on different
days of their menstrual cycle. The tampons were placed in open
tubes, so they could be smelled but not seen, then given to a panel of
assessors. The smell of each tampon was ranked on a scale from 'very
unpleasant' to 'very pleasant'. Pleasantness of smell changed with
stage of the menstrual cycle, being most unpleasant during
menstruation. On average, the smell was slightly, but not
consistently, more pleasant during the fertile phase. So by nuzzling a
woman's vulva, a man can at least tell if she is menstrual.
As long as a woman's secretions pass a man's health and fertility
test, the main piece of information he is seeking is whether she has
recently had sex with another man. The man's body can then use this
information to change the number of killers and egg-getters he
introduces into hers. As we have already seen, crude adjustments are
made on the basis of what proportion of time he has spent with the
woman over the past week or since their last intercourse (Scene 6).
The less time he has spent with her, the greater the possibility that she
might contain sperm from another man and the more sperm he
introduces. This method works, but it is crude. If his body could
know whether sperm from another man are present, it could make a
much finer adjustment to its own sperm numbers.
In Scene 10, the man came home to a partner who, at some time
during the day, had clearly been unfaithful to him. She had covered
her tracks as best she could by changing the bed, washing the sheets
and preventing him from seeing her back in case he noticed the small
marks left by her lover. Most important of all, however, she had also
had a long bath to try to remove all traces of her lover from her pubic
hair, thighs and vulval lips. In all of this, she was obeying her
conscious mind, albeit driven by a body that wanted neither to be
beaten nor deserted.
Her body had ejected her lover's flowback many hours ago, but
some traces of semen always remain in the vagina, sometimes for up
to a day. At first, she had tried to avoid sexual contact with her
partner completely. Her body favoured the
72 73
HSPERM WARS COUNTING THE COST
lover and wanted to give his sperm as easy a victory as possible. At
the same time, though, she did not want to lose her partner's support.
Consequently, when he began to nuzzle her vulva, and the risk of her
infidelity being discovered increased, she changed her strategy. She
switched from avoiding intercourse to precipitating it solely to
distract him from oral sex.
On the other side of town, the woman had returned home to a
suspicious partner. She had the advantage, however, that her vagina
contained no evidence of how close she had come to infidelity. As a
result, she had the opportunity to both reassure and mislead her
partner, not only verbally (by criticising the man she had been with)
but by forcing him to smell and lick her vulva so as to confirm her
innocence. By the end of the evening, both his mind and his body
should have been reassured.
Together, the two scenes of oral sex we have just witnessed
illustrate the interplay of reassurance and subterfuge that is a
hallmark of routine sex between couples. Men may not be able to
lick their partner's infidelity via oral sex, but they can certainly
collect information useful for deciding what to do next. In the short
term, this information can help men to prepare for sperm warfare. In
the medium term, it can help them to adjust the intensity with which
they guard their mate or search for another partner. In the long term,
it can help them to assess the desirability of desertion and, if their
partner produces a child, to judge the probability of the child having
been fathered by someone else. At the same time, through strategic
prevention or encouragement of oral sex, a woman can attempt to
reassure or dupe her partner with regard to the actual situation.
Of course, people do not always realise that they are indulging in
oral sex for the above reasons. Consciously, what a man thinks he is
doing when he licks a woman's genitals is stimulating her into
becoming lubricated for penetration. Most often, in the absence of
infidelity, what a woman thinks she is doing is seeking sexual
stimulation. Both of these things are happening, of course, but they
are merely the conscious veneer of the behaviour, not its ultimate
function. As in so much of sexual behaviour, the
mind consciously pursues superficial stimulation at the behest of a
body aiming to achieve much more potent ends.
There is no intrinsic reason why licking a woman's genitals should
stimulate her sexually any more than stamping on her foot.
Nevertheless, one action is a sexual stimulus, the other is not. What
tends to happen in the evolution of sexual stimulation is that
unequivocal signs of sexual interest become stimulating, while other
signs do not. If this were not the case, males and females would be
continually responding sexually to the most irrelevant signals.
For the reasons we have already discussed, male ancestors were
driven by their bodies to seek the valuable information contained in
and around a female's vagina — the inevitable site of insemination.
Failure to seek this information before intercourse cost the male in
four ways: it meant a greater risk of disease, more chance of
inseminating an infertile female, less chance of winning sperm wars,
and a reduced chance of combating infidelity. From the female's
perspective, these pressures on the male meant that, when a male
nuzzled her vulva, it unequivocally signalled his sexual interest. If
she was uninterested, she could simply walk away. If interested, she
needed to prepare for intercourse by lubricating her vagina, and so
forth. Such advance preparation would make the process of
insemination itself more efficient and less damaging. All in all,
females who responded to being nuzzled by an attractive male by
becoming aroused will have reproduced more successfully than those
who did not.
The same arguments apply to the male. If female ancestors
allowed him to nuzzle their vulva, instead of walking away, this
indicated that they were interested in receiving his sperm. Males who
responded by becoming aroused will have missed fewer
opportunities for intercourse than males who did not. All in all, males
who gained sexual stimulation from nuzzling the vulva of a female
will have reproduced more than those who did not.
All of these responses were shaped long before there were
humans. When our species first evolved, the males simply inherited
from our primate ancestors a predisposition for
74 75SPERM WARS
nuzzling, smelling, licking and fingering the female's genitals. We
also, male and female alike, inherited a predisposition to find such
behaviour stimulating.
SCENE 11
Checkmate
The bright-red display on the bedside clock changed from 11:59 to
12:00. It was midnight. While his lover had slept her post-coital
sleep, the man had been clock-watching. Reluctant though he was to
swap the warmth of her bed for the chill air of her room, it really
was time to go.
He gently began to wake her by kissing the middle of her back.
Their affair had begun half a year earlier in a dark summer wood
when, in an unplanned, abandoned moment, they had stripped each
other naked and she had helped him to ejaculate. Two months later,
soon after she had moved into a bed-sitter of her own, they had full
intercourse for the first time. Although they worked in the same
building, they rarely met during the day, taking great care to hide
their liaison from everybody. Two or three times a week, he visited
her bed-sitter for sex. They always went straight to bed. Time was
short — they rarely had more than an hour together. Even so, they
often had sex twice in a session. He was inseminating her about five
times a week, while still inseminating his partner once or twice a
week. His lover was eleven years younger than him, but he had
learned more about sex in six months of snatched moments with her
than he had in ten years with his partner.
For his partner's benefit, he had created a fictitious web of weekly
events at work. These gave him routine, almost infallible, alibis
which freed him to call in on his lover sometimes on his way to
work, sometimes on his way back. Tonight, however, had been
special. This freezing late-January night was his
COUNTING THE COST
lover's birthday and she had insisted on more of his time than the
usual hour. Otherwise, she would spend the evening with friends. In
the end he had invented a story which, he had to admit, seemed
rather good. He had told his partner that a long-term visitor from the
other side of the world, on discovering his interest in chess, had
challenged him to a match and had offered to cook him an authentic
ethnic meal into the bargain. He had reminded his partner that chess
took a long time, that they would probably play the best of three, and
that it could be a long evening, maybe even midnight before he came
home.
The evening had been perfect, a memory for a lifetime. He had
cooked his lover a meal and by seven they were in bed, drinking
wine, listening to music, and playing with each other's bodies as
passion came and went. Altogether it came and went, if with
increasing difficulty, four times. The last time he had only pretended
to ejaculate, but she had climaxed for the second time that evening.
Now, though, their party was over, and ahead of him were two
prospects he could do without — running the gauntlet of arrest for
drunk-driving and, even worse, the guilt and discomfort of having to
fabricate the evening's events to satisfy his partner's curiosity.
He had never quite been able to fathom why he worried so much
about being discovered. It wasn't really the prospect of his partner
leaving him, though he would miss their two children. In truth, it
would worry him more if he lost his lover. Maybe it was his partner's
threat to spend every penny he had rather than let him squander it on
another woman. Or maybe it was her oft-repeated 'joke' that if he
were ever unfaithful she would cut his balls off. He was sure she
didn't mean it. But would he ever feel safe again when she picked up
a pair of scissors or a knife? Whatever the reason, the prospect of
being discovered terrified him.
When his young lover finally surfaced from her sleep, she asked
him not to go, gently at first, then with mounting irritation. Finally,
indicating more than a little disfavour, she
76 77SPERM WARS COUNTING THE COST
told him he must go. He dressed in the cold of her room, kissed her,
hesitated a little in a vain attempt to pacify her, then left to walk to
his car. He always parked two streets away. The police did not stop
him as he drove home, despite a bad few minutes while he appeared
to be being tailed. Thirty minutes after leaving his lover, just after
one o'clock in the morning, he was home — and his partner was
waiting for him.
Hardly had he closed the front door than he was being asked
almost hysterically what was going on. Taken aback, he apologised
for being so late. The games had lasted longer than expected. But he
had won in the end, he added, seeking conviction in detail. She
paused, then asked him why, if he had been playing chess with his
foreign friend all evening, had that very same person phoned a
couple of hours ago and asked to talk to him. The man felt his mouth
freeze open. Panic swept through him. He couldn't believe his bad
luck. In the two years that his colleague had been at his institution,
not once had he phoned. How was it that, of all the nights to break
his silence, he had chosen tonight?
The man's mind raced as his face reddened and his underarms
prickled with sweat. For a moment, he almost told her everything.
Then he lied that it had been his assistant's birthday. He had been
invited to a men's night out of drink, food, strippers and pool. He
knew how much she hated him going on such nights and worried
about him drinking and driving, so he had thought it best not to tell
her.
She stared into his eyes, trying to work out if he was telling the
truth, then went across to the telephone. Pausing, phone in hand, she
asked him for his assistant's number. He said he didn't know. In any
case, the others wouldn't be back yet, because they had gone on to
another club. He had left them to come home because he knew she
would be worried if he was too late. She stared at him again. Not
knowing how to respond, he hid behind laughter. He said this was
silly. He was sorry he had lied to her, but he really had been trying to
save her worry. It wouldn't happen again. He would tell her
next time — and couldn't they please go to bed because he was drunk
and tired.
She moved towards him until their faces were almost touching and
stared into his eyes. She told him he was lying — that she knew he
was lying. Why didn't he smell of smoke and beer? She paused, then
accused him of infidelity. He denied it but she shouted him down,
asking who it was. He proclaimed his innocence yet again and
objected to her refusal to believe him.
She went quiet for a second, thinking hard. Then she told him to
take off his trousers. He protested. She insisted. He said she was
being stupid. Angrily, she began to unzip his trousers. He pushed her
away, told her to stop, and said that he would do it. As he dropped
his trousers and underwear, he hoped against hope that there would
be nothing for her to see or smell. But there was. She swore at him,
slapped his face, told him to leave her, their children and their house,
and said that she never wanted to see him again. When he hesitated,
she pushed him, trousers still round his ankles, towards the door.
At first, he didn't resist but at the door he refused to leave.
Eventually, she agreed to his spending the night on the settee as long
as he had gone by the morning. He spent an uneasy night, unable to
sleep partly through discomfort, partly through worry about the
future, but most of all because he was afraid. The thought that his
partner was about to enter the room, knife or other weapon in hand
and intent on revenge, plagued him all night.
He left early, before she came downstairs, but returned home at
mid-day. With the children at school, they had a long argument. His
partner told him she could never trust him again and that she couldn't
live with someone she couldn't trust. He maintained that the evening
was a one-off. He said the woman was an ex-girlfriend who had
emigrated years ago and then, just last week, had contacted him out
of the blue. About to visit the country again for a few days, she
wanted to look up old friends and to see him again. He had agreed,
78 79SPERM WARS COUNTING THE COST
not expecting anything to happen after all this time. But they had got
drunk, she had invited him back to her hotel and things had just
happened.
He was really sorry. He wished he'd resisted, but she had gone now
and it would never happen again. He'd had time to think and the fear
of losing her and their children had made him realise that all he really
wanted was her, his home and their family. He would leave if she
wanted but did she realise they couldn't afford to keep the house and
pay for a flat for him? If she wanted him gone, they would have to
sell the house and buy something smaller for her and the children.
Was it really worth putting the children through a separation? All
because of a night's weakness on his part that would never happen
again?
In the end she agreed that he could stay but said he would have to
sleep on the bedroom floor. Nor should he imagine he would ever
have sex with her again. Or that she would stay faithful. As soon as
she could find another man, she would be gone, taking the children
with her.
In fact, he was allowed back in her bed after only a few days and
they had sex again after six weeks. He never did tell his lover what
had happened and their affair continued undiminished for another six
months. She then met a man of her own age and ended their
relationship. He stayed with his partner for another five years but
during that time, without her knowing, was unfaithful with three
women. The first, another girl eleven years his junior, conceived
during their affair. But then, after two months, the man she was living
with deserted her, doubting that the child was his, and she miscarried.
Just briefly, he considered leaving his partner for this younger woman
but after some hesitation the girl herself decided she did not want
him.
Ironically, despite his four affairs, it was not his infidelity but his
partner's that eventually ended their fifteen-year-long relationship. As
good as her word, as soon as she met another man she left, taking the
children with her. She didn't know it but her timing was perfect. His
final infidelity had given
him gonorrhea and she departed just in time to avoid being infected
herself.
This was the beginning of the worst phase of his life. With
treatment, he recovered from his infection but was warned by his
doctor, correctly as it turned out, that he might no longer be fertile. He
was forced to sell the house so that his ex-partner could take her share
of the equity. The cost of supporting his two children combined with
losses from two silly financial gambles reduced him almost to penury.
His days of affairs with younger girls apparently over, he moved in
with a widow, ten years older than himself, whose children were
living abroad. After this, life slowly began to improve.
At first his own teenaged children had lived amicably with their
mother and her new partner. But when she began a second family,
relationships in the household became strained. Eventually, his
children moved back to live with him and his new partner. Luckily,
she proved to be a good stepmother, treating his children in the few
years before they left home as if they were her own.
hy is it so important to a woman to prevent or, failing that,
detect her partner's infidelity? What are the repercussions of
failure for her pursuit of reproductive success?
A woman has a lot to lose from her partner's infidelity. And many,
though not all, of the dangers are the same as for a man. First, there is
the risk that she will have to share his wealth, time, energy and other
resources with the other woman. Secondly, there is the danger that he
will eventually leave her for the other woman, reducing his support
for her still further. Whichever of them looks after the children, they
face the dangers of single- or step-parenthood which we discussed in
relation to Scene 9. Thirdly, there is the greater risk of contracting
sexually transmitted diseases, because her partner is at greater risk.
There is one risk, however, that does not
80 81
WSPERM WARS
affect her. Unlike a man, she is in no danger of being tricked into
raising any children by her partner's lover. This means that, on
balance, infidelity is slightly less of a threat to a woman than it is to
a man.
This conclusion is as applicable to monogamous birds, monkeys
and apes as it is to humans. The result is that, although both males
and females of all these species try to prevent their partner from
being unfaithful, males are significantly more possessive of their
partner than are females. They are significantly more aggressive, and
significantly less forgiving. Females may attempt to drive away other
females. They may attempt to intervene between their mate and
another female. They may even desert their young if they receive too
little time and help from their partner. However, since their physical
commitment to preventing infidelity is less than the male's, they are
less likely to desert if their partner is unfaithful. The same is true for
humans.
Women do sometimes wound or kill a partner if he is unfaithful.
They do sometimes wound or kill his lover, leave their partner or
drive him out, and they also sometimes abandon their children to
him to raise. But again, they are less likely to do all of these things
than are men and are more likely to overlook discovered
indiscretions. Nevertheless, the threat of retribution is always there,
and real enough for most men to attempt to hide their infidelity.
Arguably, male animals are never quite as subtle over their
infidelity as females, maybe because the costs of discovery are less.
My favourite description of sophisticated infidelity on the part of the
female concerns a small brown bird, the dunnock. The male and
female, the epitome of contented monogamy, were first seen as they
hopped side by side across a lawn, pecking up morsels of food.
When they reached a bush, the male went round one way, the female
the other. As soon as the bush shielded her from her partner, the
female flew in an instant into dense vegetation nearby. There, she
copulated with a lurking male, then flew back to her position behind
the bush.
COUNTING THE COST
A few seconds later, male and female hopped back into each other's
view, past the bush. Still intently pecking at morsels, the female
acted as if nothing had happened.
Nearly as appealing is the film, shown worldwide, of a female
monkey foraging on the ground for food while being watched
attentively from a high branch by her consort. Alongside her comes
another male. He sits down, innocently picking at himself, hiding his
erection from her consort. Every time the consort's attention is
distracted, the other male taps the female on the shoulder. In an
instant she stands and presents and the male inseminates her. So
quick is their intercourse that by the time her consort looks back in
their direction, they have resumed their previous activities —
innocence personified.
Maybe a female dunnock who flies into vegetation is no more
subtle than a male who hides there, waiting. Maybe a female monkey
who feigns innocence until her partner is distracted is no more
sophisticated than a male who hides his erection and inseminates at
the speed of light. And maybe a woman who has sex with the
window-cleaner while her partner is at the shops is no more
sophisticated than a man who has sex with his secretary in a
cupboard at the office party. But, on balance, one always has the
feeling that the female of the species, whatever the species, has that
slight edge when it comes to ingenuity and imagination. As far as
humans are concerned, the best we can use as evidence is that, taking
thousands of instances into account, the man is more likely, on
average, to have his infidelity discovered than the woman.
In Scene 11, the woman needed to check her mate's genitals only
superficially to confirm his infidelity. Had he been more cautious and
washed himself before returning home, he might have escaped
detection. Had he fabricated a better story, he might, again, have
escaped detection. But he did neither, and suffered the consequences.
From the moment his infidelity was uncovered, his partner decided
that when the right moment came she would leave him, rather than
wait for him to leave her.
82 83SPERM WARS COUNTING THE COST
Had the man's infidelity not been discovered, he would probably
have done better reproductively: at the very least, he would have
had the chance of a third child with his partner. As it was, he did
not. Nor did he manage to compensate for this loss by siring a child
via infidelity or via a second longer-term partner. He nearly
succeeded in fathering a child by another man's partner, but failed.
He nearly attracted another fertile partner through his infidelity, but
failed when it came right down to it. Any further chance he had of
producing children faded when he contracted gonorrhea (at least
half of all human infertility is due to sexually transmitted disease).
Even if he had remained fertile, his age and reduced circumstances
made him less attractive to fertile women. Instead, his major
reproductive strategy became his partnership with an older, probably
post-menopausal, woman — in the sense that, with her help, his
children will probably have left home fully able to realise their
reproductive potential. Eventually, they would give him
grandchildren. Had his infidelity not been discovered, he might have
had more grandchildren, but at least he had some.
Had the woman not discovered her partner's infidelity, she would
probably have done worse reproductively. Of course, she might
have had another child with him. But all the time she was with him,
she would unknowingly have been vulnerable to sudden desertion
and decreased support. As it happened, she would also eventually
have contracted gonorrhea and risked future sterility. Instead, her
discovery helped her to take advantage of his support for five more
years, then pick her moment to leave him for another man and a
second family. She will have ended up with the same number of
grandchildren as him via their mutual children, plus more via the
children in her second family.
Reproductively, infidelity has the potential to benefit both men
and women, as we shall see later in this book. However, as these last
four scenes have shown, it can also be costly even if it is
successfully hidden from the partner. On top of this, however much
a person may suffer from their own infidelity,
they are likely to suffer even more if their partner is unfaithful —
especially if they fail to detect it.
Sometimes the benefits of infidelity will outweigh the costs and
sometimes they will not. As we noted earlier, the reproductive
successes of each generation will be those people who, consciously
or subconsciously, judge correctly when it is and when it is not
advantageous to be unfaithful. Then, when infidelity is judged to be
advantageous, the most successful will be those who hide their own
infidelity while preventing or at least detecting their partner's. The
reproductive failures will be those who misjudge their situation, fail
to hide their own infidelity or fail to prevent or detect their partner's.
Because of these conflicts of interest, there is very little variation
in the strategy shown by men, women and virtually all other species
of animals which form long-term relationships — to attempt secret
infidelity on the one hand while preventing a partner from doing the
same on the other.
84 85SECRET ANTICIPATION
CHAPTER FIVE
Secret
Anticipation
SCENE 12
A Double Life
Another day at work was over, and the man on the fifth floor was just
leaving for home. As he stepped into the lift, his eye was caught by a
new piece of graffiti. He smiled. In colourful slang it implied that the
boss of their section was not to be trusted — because he spent too
much time masturbating.
The lift stopped on the third floor and a young girl stepped in. He
had seen her only once before, but she had immediately won a
starring role in his fantasies. She was new to the section, an extra
secretary for the man who was the target of the graffiti. He watched
her face as the door closed. She saw the words immediately. Her eyes
flicked sideways and caught his. They smiled at each other and she
blushed, but nothing was said. When the lift reached the ground floor
and they stepped out, she turned right and he turned left, heading for
the car park and home.
Thirty minutes later, he drove into his garage. Once in the house
he kissed his partner, admired his children's latest drawings, and
went upstairs to undress for a shower. Even as he was locking the
bathroom door, he was handling his genitals, encouraging an
erection. By the time he had shut the
cubicle door and switched on the shower, his penis was ready for
action. As he pumped himself, he searched through his mind for a
sexual image. For about the tenth time in recent months, he tried
mentally undressing his partner's sister, but the image was losing its
power. He tried undressing her again, this time from the back, but it
still failed. Then he remembered the young girl in the lift. OK, so the
lift breaks down between floors. They both undress, he kneels down,
she stands astride him, begins to crouch in order to sit on his erect
penis, and. . . . But there was no need for an 'and'. With that image,
he ejaculated, flushed the semen down the plughole, then continued
with his shower as if nothing had happened. The whole exercise had
taken about two minutes.
As he showered, he mused over these routine urges to masturbate.
It was as if he had a double life — sex with his partner on Saturday
and Sunday, sex with himself on Tuesday and Thursday. Sometimes
an occasion would be missed, sometimes an occasion would be
gained, but on the whole these were his two routines.
Of course, his sex life with himself was not entirely routine. There
had been the occasional highlight, particularly when he was younger.
A goodnight kiss with a new girl, or a heavy but unconsummated
petting session at a party, had both at one time or another sent him
into a toilet to seek relief in ejaculation. Even now, an erotic scene at
the movies or on TV would sometimes have the same effect. Such
highlights apart, though, his sex life with himself was as much a
routine as his sex life with his partner. Usually, just like tonight, it
was barely even sexual, having more in common with urination and
defecation than with intercourse and sexual excitement. There was
little urgency, little excitement, and little feeling of satisfaction —
just a feeling of relief.
ost men should be able to identify with this scene. For twothirds, their very first ejaculation will have been triggered by
self-stimulation. Over 98 per cent will masturbate
85 87
MSPERM WARS SECRET ANTICIPATION
at some time in their lives. Moreover, virtually all will have done so
by the age of twenty. However, despite such widespread practice, few
men would view their habit of shedding sperm as an important
weapon in their pursuit of reproductive success. Yet this is just what it
is. Scene 12 is the first of three in this chapter, each of which explores
one or more aspects of the shedding of sperm (through masturbation
or 'wet dreams').
How often a man masturbates depends on how old he is and how
often he ejaculates for other reasons. On average, how often he
ejaculates altogether (intercourse, masturbation, and nocturnally) will
closely reflect his rate of sperm production. This varies from man to
man, depending on the size of his testes. It also varies with age. From
almost immediately after puberty to the age of about thirty, an
average man produces around three hundred million sperm a day and
ejaculates between three and four times a week. By the age of fifty
these rates have dropped to about 175 million a day and to twice a
week and, by age seventy-five to about twenty million a day and to
less than once a month. If a man under thirty has intercourse three
times or more a week, he will rarely masturbate. If he has sex only
once a week, he will probably masturbate about twice.
Men are not the only mammals to shed sperm through
masturbation. Dogs, of course, are notorious for such behaviour. One
of their habits is to affectionately clasp a person around the knee with
their front limbs and to rub their genitals up and down the dismayed
person's leg. Albeit using other methods of self-stimulation, a wide
range of other species, such as rats, mice, squirrels, porcupines, pigs,
deer, whales, elephants and monkeys, are also known to shed their
sperm. Just like men, the males of these species will often masturbate
between routine inseminations of females.
Masturbation may not seem a very sophisticated activity, but it is.
It is the means by which an active, or hopeful, man tailors his next
inseminate to its likely circumstances. By anticipating what those
circumstances might be, he can use masturbation to adjust the age and
number of sperm he will then introduce
into the potential female. Not only that, but he can also adjust what
proportion of those sperm will be blockers, killers and egg-getters.
A man's body can distinguish between masturbation and
insemination. The ejaculates produced are not identical. Many factors
influence the number of sperm introduced during intercourse — such
as how many are needed to top up his partner and to succeed in
warfare, given the perceived level of risk. But, apart from a man's age,
only one major factor — time since last ejaculation — affects the
number shed during masturbation. When a man masturbates, he voids
about five million sperm for every hour since he last ejaculated. This
seems to be the rate at which sperm exceed their sell-by date as
blockers, killers and egg-getters.
Sperm change their roles as they age. Most are killers when they
are young and blockers when they are old. Killers need to be full of
energy and movement and to have a cap full of lethal chemicals
(Scene 7). Blockers, however, can be old. Or, to put it another way,
the only use for geriatric sperm is as blockers. To block a cervical
channel, a sperm needs to have just enough energy to swim out of the
seminal pool and travel a little way into the cervical mucus. Then it
can simply coil its tail and sit still. It can even die if it wants. The
channel will still be blocked.
Egg-getters also change with age. Important chemical changes
have to take place on an egg-getter's surface before it can penetrate an
egg, changes that do not occur until the sperm gets close to the
fertilisation zone in an oviduct. As a result, an egg-getter's life is
divided into two phases of activity. It has its first burst of energy
before it is fertile — this is when it surf-boards and swims to the rest
area in an oviduct. Then, during its brief phase of fertility, it has a
second burst of energy-when it reaches, then swims through, the zone
of fertilisation. After that, it dies.
The two columns of sperm queuing to be ejaculated (Scene 4) are
not just a homogenous, characterless mixture. Inevitably, those at the
front of the queue, near the man's urethra, are the
88 89SPERM WARS SECRET ANTICIPATION
oldest. The ones at the back, way down in his testes, are the youngest.
There may be some mixing of ages as the sperm are loaded into the
urethra. Even so, when he places his seminal pool at the top of a
woman's vagina, the oldest sperm tend to be introduced first and go to
the bottom of the pool. Younger sperm arrive in later spurts and go to
the top.
The younger sperm, being more active, will be the first to enter the
cervical mucus. Older sperm leave the pool more slowly. Very old
sperm cannot leave the pool at all and are doomed to be ejected by
the woman in her flowback. From their position higher up in the
seminal pool, the younger sperm may have to swim down through
groups of older ones before they can swim up and enter the elephant's
trunk of the cervix. Much depends on how deeply the cervix dips into
the pool. Too many old sperm in the pool hinder the youngsters as
they try to escape into the cervix.
Masturbation between intercourses usually means that a man
inseminates his partner with fewer sperm than if he had not
masturbated. However, the sperm he introduces are younger, more
dynamic, and less hindered by supernumerary geriatric sperm. As a
result, just as many, if not more, manage to escape the seminal pool
and stay in the woman. Moreover, the sperm which escape are
younger and more active — altogether a more efficient army.
All the same, a man needs to inject some old sperm as blockers —
as many as are needed to top up the population of blockers in his
partner's cervical mucus. For three days after a couple's last routine
intercourse, the ageing of sperm in a man's tubes tracks the loss of
blockers in his partner's cervix with exquisite precision. Given any
gap between successive intercourses of from thirty minutes to three
days, he can introduce into his partner the perfect ejaculate to top up
her population of blockers. Once the gap exceeds three to four days,
however, his sperm queue develops an excess of blockers. This
happens because there are only so many channels in the cervical
mucus, and once he has enough old sperm to block these, any
further blockers are redundant. In fact, they are worse than redundant,
for they probably hinder the escape of his younger sperm from the
seminal pool into the cervix. Beyond a certain point, therefore, the
man's best policy is to shed the oldest part of his column of sperm
before inseminating a woman, rather than leaving them for her to eject
in her flowback. This is one of the functions of masturbation.
If the gap between inseminations exceeds four days, the ideal
inseminate is produced by masturbating two days before the next
intercourse. This gives a man two sperm columns, each with about
twenty million aged blockers at the front of the queue and from a
hundred million to five hundred million younger blockers and killers
further back. Scattered among these younger sperm are egg-getters, in
a ratio of about one egg-getter to ninety-nine kamikaze types. About
10 per cent of the egg-getters are already at their peak of fertility and
will go immediately to the oviduct. The remainder will reach their
peak at different times over the five days after insemination.
This profile allows a man maximum flexibility in adjusting his
sperm army according to the risk of warfare. If he has guarded his
partner closely since they last had sex, he needs to introduce into her a
full quota of blockers but only a few killers and egg-getters. So he
injects all of the blockers at the front of the queue, plus a small portion
of the queue behind containing the killers and egg-getters. If he has
spent less time with her, so that the risk of sperm warfare is greater, he
needs more killers and egg-getters. So he ships in more of each
column. The number of blockers stays the same, but he introduces
more of the younger sperm, the killers and egg-getters.
In order to have a two-day-old column of sperm waiting to be
introduced, a man needs to anticipate his next intercourse with his
partner. Subconsciously, the brain must play a major role in this
anticipation. The urges that men get to masturbate are timed by their
brains and bodies to achieve this gap between masturbation and
intercourse. The man in Scene 12 most often masturbates on Tuesdays
and Thursdays in routine anticipation
90 91SPERM WARS SECRET ANTICIPATION
of sex on Saturdays. Occasionally, he may masturbate only on
Wednesdays. The result is that he rarely inseminates his partner with
an ejaculate older than three days or younger than two. This should
mean that, at each intercourse, the army he injects is ideal for the
circumstances. More often than not, of course, an army is unnecessary:
no war takes place, and all he really needs is to introduce a few million
egg-getters of different ages. But, just in case his partner has been or
might be unfaithful, he injects a measured number of blockers and
killers.
The major reproductive problem a man encounters with routine
masturbation is that there is an unpredictable element to routine sex.
As we have seen, this unpredictability is generated largely by the
conflict between men and women over the function of routine sex, and
the problem occurs when anticipated inseminations fail to materialise
(though spontaneous and unexpected seduction by his partner can also
be problematic).
For example, thanks to his masturbation routine, the man in Scene
12 arrives for intercourse each Saturday night with an ideal ejaculate
waiting in his tubes — a balanced mixture of blockers, killers and egggetters. Suppose, however, that one Saturday night the couple argue,
pass out through drink, or experience any one of the myriad
circumstances that can prevent them having intercourse. On Sunday,
the man now has in his tubes an ejaculate that is rapidly going past its
best. His body then has the choice of either waiting for the next
intercourse or masturbating. If he waits for the next intercourse, he
will introduce in his partner an ejaculate that is on the old side of its
prime, with too many geriatric blockers and many ageing killers and
egg-getters. On the other hand, if he masturbates, but then
unexpectedly has the chance of intercourse with his partner only an
hour or so later, he will introduce an ejaculate short on blockers.
Neither alternative is ideal and could put him at a disadvantage if
either of those ejaculates really does have to fight a sperm war.
This problem for the man is an opportunity for the woman. One
way she can maneuver her partner into injecting a sub-optimal army is
to change their sex routine unexpectedly. If she
is then unfaithful in the next few days, her lover's army will have the
advantage (Scenes 6 and 26).
Scene 13
Multiply, But Don't Divide
The evening flight had taken three hours. Arriving just after midnight,
the four business colleagues, two men and two women, had taken a
taxi from the airport and gone straight to their hotel. Their rooms were
all on the same corridor. As they unlocked their respective doors, the
man said goodnight to his three associates, then went into his room.
They all had an early start in the morning.
Once unpacked, he undressed and showered. The room was very
hot. Too restless to sleep, he lit a cigarette, then lay naked on his bed,
staring at the ceiling. Handling his cigarette dextrously with one hand
and his genitals abstractedly with the other, a kaleidoscope of thoughts
began to pass through his head. Momentary images of his children
flitted by — followed closely by images of his partner. Remembering
their last intercourse, two nights ago, he mused over whether she had
really climaxed. Or had she been faking? Perhaps her performance
had been a gift to him, a memory to take on his trip. If so, it was a pity
their mutual sexual act had been superseded. The following night, the
one before his trip, he had slipped into the bathroom and masturbated
while she was on the phone to her mother.
His thoughts turned to his companions and his strategy for the next
two days. He could hardly have been luckier. The two most desirable
women in the organisation were both on the trip, and he had two
nights in which to try to bed them. Not for the first time since the trip
had been announced, he toyed with the idea of being in bed with them
both at the same time. He imagined
92 93SPERM WARS
them naked, writhing over his body, each begging him to enter her
first.
As his fantasy unfolded, his penis grew in his hand and his brain
whispered that maybe he would like to ejaculate. He stayed on the
bed for a while, enjoying his fantasies and the growing sensation in
his genitals. Then, when the time came, he went over to the
washbasin and finished himself off. Later, as he drifted off to sleep,
he wondered how well the next two evenings would match his
fantasy.
The following evening, back in his hotel room, he phoned home.
After talking for ten minutes, he sent his love to the children, blew
his partner a kiss, and rang off. Reassured that everything was as it
should be with his family, he went to his fifth-floor window and
looked out over the city skyline. Perhaps his wasn't a bad job, after
all. Business was over for the day. Now all he had to do was look
forward to the evening with his three colleagues. There would be
food, drink and, with any luck, sex.
The evening began well but ended badly. In the taxi to the
restaurant, he sat next to the woman he most wanted to see in his bed
and interpreted her body language favourably. However, as soon as
they hit the city bars, it was obvious she preferred the other man, his
boss. As the evening progressed, he could do nothing but watch as
they became more and more physical. He made a few vain attempts
to get between them but she virtually ignored him. Trying to make
the best of the situation, he turned his attention to his second choice.
But after a few drinks she began complaining of feeling tired and
unwell. He suggested accompanying her back to the hotel, hoping the
evening might not yet be over — but it was. At the hotel, she made
her excuses and went straight to her room. He stayed in the hotel bar
for a while, then went to his own room.
All he had left for the evening were his fantasies. For the third
night running, he masturbated before going to bed. It was like being a
teenager again, masturbating nearly every day for a week or so at a
time. He slept only fitfully. At two in the morning he heard his boss
and the woman come back and, as far as he could
94
SECRET ANTICIPATION
tell, both went into his boss's room. At five he thought he heard her
leaving.
The following evening was quite different. The boss ignored his
conquest of the night before and made immediate overtures to the
other woman. Without hesitation, she responded warmly. He tried to
capitalise on the turn of events, but for a while the jilted woman was
single-mindedly sullen. Then suddenly, almost as if a switch had been
flicked, she began to respond to his advances. Eventually, he realised
that her responsiveness had more to do with making his boss jealous
than with genuine interest, but he made the most of it. She became
very drunk and by the time the four of them arrived back at the hotel,
he thought she was either going to pass out or throw up. He was
undecided whether he should try to have sex with her, but she made
the decision for him.
Waiting until the boss and the other woman could see what was
happening, she grabbed his arm and virtually dragged him into her
room. Once in, she fell on to the bed and began a verbal assault on
their two companions. Her tirade scarcely faltered, even when he
undressed and then entered her. As he had masturbated three times in
the last three days, and as he was fairly drunk, intercourse was long.
He needed many minutes of thrusting before he began to feel like
ejaculating. His concentration wasn't helped by the way the woman
scarcely seemed to know he was inside her. Throughout his sexual
performance, she never once stopped talking.
After he had ejaculated, she gradually ran out of verbal steam and
fell into a drunken sleep. Two hours later, he tried to have sex with
her sleeping body. But she woke and, with irritation in her voice and
manner, told him to stop and leave. She wanted to sleep — but first,
she had to be sick. In the end he gave up, got out of bed, and went
back to his own room. He was just in time to see the second woman
closing the boss's door and crossing the corridor, naked buttocks
peeping out from the clothes she was clutching round her front.
The four missed each other at breakfast and did not meet until
95SPERM WARS SECRET ANTICIPATION
it was time to take a taxi to the airport. There was an uneasy
politeness, and nothing was said of the night's events. At the airport,
the man bought toys for his children and perfume for his partner.
The woman whose bed he had shared the night before spent most of
the flight in the toilet, being sick.
That evening, back at home, he told his partner he thought his
boss had had sex with both of the women. Responding to her
questioning, he denied that he had found either of them attractive.
Later that evening, unusually for a Thursday, he and his partner had
sex, and over the next few days life at home and at work returned to
normal.
Two months later, the woman who had slept with both men on
the business trip announced her pregnancy. There was some story
about being sick and her pill failing, but the man never quizzed her
too closely. Six months after the business trip, he met the woman
and her partner at a party. As he listened to the certainty with which
the couple spoke about their forthcoming baby, even he began to
wonder if he had really ever had sex with her.
he role of masturbation in a man's pursuit of reproductive
success is not limited to its role in routine sex (Scene 12). In
fact, in many ways, it becomes a much more potent weapon in his
preparation for infidelity and sperm warfare.
As we discussed in Scene 12, most of a man's sex life with
himself is just as routine as his sex life with his partner. Not
surprisingly, as routine sex is the main focus of his sexual activity,
it is this to which his body is most finely adjusted. But infidelity
introduces a non-routine element into his sex life with his partner —
and, therefore, into his sex life with himself as well.
When a man has an opportunity to inseminate a woman other
than his partner, he has a problem. The ejaculate waiting in his
sperm tubes is tailored to top up his partner, and so is relatively rich
in blockers. What he needs for infidelity,
however — if it is to be reproductively successful — is an ejaculate
rich in killers and egg-getters. The woman he is about to inseminate
has an above average chance of containing sperm from another man,
especially if she has a regular partner. She will already have blocking
sperm in her cervix. These may or may not need topping up,
depending on how recently she has had sex, but blockers are not a
lover's main concern. What he needs is young, active sperm that can
get through the cervix in numbers and prevail in combat. Blockers
are at best a luxury; at worst a hindrance. As with the man in Scene
13, once the brain begins to anticipate infidelity, the body increases
the masturbation rate, thereby producing and maintaining a young,
killer-rich ejaculate in his tubes, ready and waiting for action. The
ideal inseminate for infidelity is one that has been waiting to be
ejaculated for no more than about twenty-four hours
Another situation in which the ideal inseminate is twenty-four
hours old or less occurs when a man has no regular sexual partner.
(All men have such a phase during adolescence, and many have
additional such phases later on when 'between partners'.) In this
situation too, he needs to keep his sperm column young and in a state
of continuous readiness — intercourse and sperm warfare could be
just around the corner. As he searches for a sexual opportunity, he
needs a waiting ejaculate that is heavily dominated by young,
energetic killers and egg-getters primed to head straight for the
oviducts. Frequent masturbation maintains such an ejaculate —
hence the appropriate urges experienced by single men.
Almost as interesting as the function of masturbation is its secrecy
and lack of social acceptability. Among humans, it is most often
conducted in private. It is often also the target of prejudice. The
graffiti artist in the lift in Scene 12 has his counterparts all over the
world. Everywhere, people vilify men for masturbating, often using
terms of abuse specific to the behaviour. So strong is this social
disapproval that many cultures and religions actually outlaw the
activity. Even
96 97
TSPERM WARS
in cultures that stop short of outlawing it, stories and folklore may
exist (such as 'masturbation leads to blindness') that are designed to
scare men into refraining. The irony, of course, is that the graffiti
artist and all his counterparts world-wide will almost certainly
practise masturbation themselves. So why is masturbation so often
surrounded by secrecy, prejudice and hypocrisy?
If a man is to hide infidelity from his partner, it is important that
there is no overt change in his behaviour: any change could alert her
to his new situation. He cannot, for example, alter their usual sex
routine. Nor — if she is aware of it at all — must his partner notice
a change in his masturbation routine. As we have seen, a sudden
increase in his masturbation rate could mean he is anticipating
infidelity. A sudden decrease could mean he is already being
unfaithful, ejaculating so often through intercourse that he would
gain no benefit from masturbation.
Assuming, again, that he had always been secretive about his
masturbating, he has two options. The first is to maintain his usual
routine. But if he does this, he injects inefficient sperm armies into
his lover. The alternative is to continue to be generally secretive
over his masturbation so that no change in routine can be noticed. It
is, of course, no threat to a man's strategy if his partner detects an
occasional episode. In fact, deliberately allowing detection can
sometimes be a strategy in itself — especially if it reassures or misleads. A man need worry only if his partner detects so many
occasions that she is able to work out his whole masturbation
routine.
Obviously, secrecy is most important once males have partners,
or are competing for partners. Then, masturbation patterns need to
be hidden not only from the partner but also from other males.
Imagine a situation in which a man allowed a male friend to know
his routine. Then his body urged him to increase his masturbation
rate in anticipation of infidelity — with the friend's partner! Just in
case such a situation might arise, it is far better
SECRET ANTICIPATION
for a man to hide his masturbation routine from everybody in the first
place. Only among groups of adolescent males without partners is
such secrecy perhaps less important. All adolescents know that they
are each on the lookout for intercourse. Frequent masturbation, even
if obvious to other partnerless males, gives little away.
The secrecy which surrounds masturbation is therefore
understandable, given its function in the context of reproductive
success. So, too, is prejudice and hypocrisy. Since the aim of
masturbation is to give the male an edge over others in sperm
warfare, he gains most if he masturbates but can dissuade those
around him from doing so. That way, he gains competitive benefits
that his rivals do not. The world-wide tendency to criticise, even
victimise, other people for masturbating while continuing to
masturbate oneself is thus as strategic as masturbation itself.
There is one further element in Scene 13 that should be discussed
now — alcohol. This is, and has been (probably for many thousands
of years), an important factor in many people's sex lives. It also has a
very well documented effect on sexual behaviour. The more men and
women drink, the more they both seek intercourse — or, at least, the
less they resist it. Perversely, however, beyond a certain level of
intoxication, both men and women find it more difficult to become
aroused. Men find erection more difficult — the 'brewer's droop'
syndrome — and women find their vaginas, and often their clitorises,
less sensitive. This secondary effect eventually makes intercourse
impossible for a man, but not for a woman. Thus, the more men
drink, the more they want sex but the less able they are to have it. In
contrast, the more women drink, the more they want and can have
sex. It is just that, beyond a certain point, they may not enjoy it
much.
Alcohol does not negate any of the strategies we discuss in this
book. All of the patterns are still there: for example, women still
show a menstrual cycle of varying sexual interest. Even under the
influence of alcohol, they are still more likely to be unfaithful
98 99SPERM WARS SECRET ANTICIPATION
didn't fully wake until he felt the semen trickling over his belly,
down his side, and on to the bottom sheet. He groaned inwardly and
wiped the ejaculate off his body with the top sheet.
That was his first wet dream for a year. He turned over, away
from the rapidly cooling wet patch. Briefly, he was an adolescent
again, worrying how he could hide the patch from his mother in the
morning. At times during his early teenage years, he had even worried
about going to bed at all in case he ejaculated. It was bad enough at
home, but if ever he stayed at a friend's house he could scarcely sleep
all night for fear of leaving his mark. Eventually, he had discovered
that if he masturbated before going to sleep when away from home,
wet dreams rarely happened.
Since then, these nocturnal surprises had virtually disappeared from
his life. Now, in his early thirties, they were a rare event. The last
time, a year ago, was when he had flu and a slight fever. Then his
partner had reacted badly on discovering the mark on the sheet,
claiming it was a slight on her sexual attractiveness — and how
could he be feeling like sex if he was ill, anyway? He wondered if she
would react the same way this time. But, unlike during adolescence,
the thought of being discovered did not keep him awake. Within a
minute, he had drifted back into sleep.
or one in five men, their very first ejaculation occurs
spontaneously. Most often, this first occurrence is a wet dream,
but for a few unfortunate boys it occurs in public. This is usually
due to subliminal stimulation (watching a film, climbing a tree), or
extreme stress (reading in front of a class at school). After the first
few occasions, however, almost all spontaneous ejaculations occur
in private, at night, while asleep — as wet dreams. At some time in
their lives, over 80 per cent of men experience these nocturnal
events. So, how do they help a man in his pursuit of reproductive
success?
Wet dreams can occur at any time of life, but are most common in
the teens and early twenties, and are most likely after periods of
abstinence from intercourse and masturbation. But only during the
teens do they occur often enough to be a direct substitute for other
outlets. The adolescent's body aims to ejaculate at least three times a
week, and if he omits to do so via masturbation (or intercourse, if he
is lucky), wet dreams act as insurance.
During adolescence, wet dreams probably tailor the ejaculate just
as precisely as masturbation. Later, they occur much too rarely to be
part of the three-a-week system. From his mid-twenties onwards,
even if a man fails to ejaculate via intercourse or masturbation for
days or even weeks, wet dreams may not occur. He will still get
virtually nightly erections during REM sleep (the deepest kind) and
dreams, but his body seems to inhibit ejaculation.
After adolescence, nocturnal ejaculations are probably most likely
to occur when the sperm waiting to exit have been damaged in some
way. A high temperature, for example, during flu or other infections,
can kill or damage these waiting sperm. The body still generates an
urge to masturbate under such circumstances, but if the man gets no
opportunity for secrecy during the day, the body forces a wet dream
to rid his sperm columns of these moribund tenants at night.
Humans are by no means the only species to ejaculate spontaneously. Rats, cats and probably most mammals will from time to
time ejaculate in their sleep, especially around puberty. In men, it is
sleeping with a partner that most often seems to mark the change
from the function of wet dreams as a back-up in his three-a-week
system, to their being rare events.
As we have already discussed (Scene 13), the timing and frequency with which a man sheds sperm can give a clear indication to
an observer both of his current sexual activity and of his
expectations. Secrecy is important to the success of male strategy,
and it is probably this need for secrecy that has caused men's bodies
to avoid wet dreams as sexual outlets once they have a partner. They
are not as easy to hide from a partner as masturbation, because the
evidence remains on the sheet. Since a man has much more control
over when and where he ejaculates during masturbation, wet dreams
are a suitable back-up for masturbation only in young men without a
partner.
102 103
FSUCCESSFUL FAILURE
CHAPTER SIX
Successful Failure
SCENE 15
Home for the Day
The soldier stopped pedalling and allowed his bicycle to free-wheel
down the steep hill. He welcomed the brief moment of relaxation. It
was over two hours since he had cycled out of his barracks in the
heat of the June evening. Now, as the sun dipped towards the horizon
behind him, he still needed another half-hour to get home. His bike
had no lights, but he might just arrive before it would matter. As he
gathered speed and the fields and hedgerows raced past him, he
could scarcely believe his luck, both bad and good. The bad luck was
that, for some wartime reason, the whole barracks was being moved
much further away from his home. The good luck was that he had
been given an unexpected twenty-four-hour leave. He had his bike,
he had the strength and energy, and he certainly had the motivation.
A three-hour ride? Nothing to it.
His partner didn't know he was coming home. For a moment she
was stunned when, just as it was getting dark, the back door opened.
Her two daughters, aged eleven and seven, were upstairs, asleep.
Otherwise, she was alone in the house. When she identified the
intruder, she was both pleased and unnerved. Pleased, because she
missed his company during the long weeks between visits home.
Pleased, because she had been feeling sexually frustrated for days.
Unnerved, because if he
had arrived an hour earlier he would have found another man in the
house.
So far, her genuine claims of fidelity during his long absences had
always been accepted — eventually. Her position in such pleadings
was particularly vulnerable because her elder daughter was not his,
and he knew it. She was the product of a springtime indiscretion. As
a twenty-two-year-old farm girl, she had allowed herself to be
coerced into sex with the man for whom she worked. Never would
the woman forget that day, twelve years ago, that nearly ruined her
life. Even now, the man's eyes still stared at her in her dreams and
from her daughter's face.
On finding she was pregnant, she had lost her job, her mother's
love, and her freedom. She was banished, first to live with her
grandmother for a few months during the most obvious phase of her
pregnancy, and then to a confinement in the house of a tyrannical,
moralistic midwife. There was no doubt that she owed this soldier
who had just walked through the door a lifetime's gratitude for
offering to take on and support her and her baby daughter. And he
had done this despite the opposition of his own parents and despite
the prejudice of the villagers in whose community they lived and
worked. Four years after they had met, she had given him his own
daughter, the consequence of New Year celebrations — but he
desperately wanted a son. Maybe if war hadn't broken out, they
would have had another child. But it did, and they hadn't.
He enjoyed the camaraderie of army life, but constantly worried
about what his partner was doing back at home. Knowing this, she
shuddered at what might have happened had he arrived home and
found another man in the house. In fact, her relationship with this
other man had so far been totally platonic. But she knew his
intentions were far from innocent and tonight, for the first time, she
had found herself being tempted. Who knows what would have
happened if the girls had gone to bed at their proper time, instead of
staying up as unwitting chaperons?
After a welcoming hug and kiss, she told her partner to wash
104 105SPERM WARS SUCCESSFUL FAILURE
away his cyclist's sweat while she prepared what food she could
from a temporarily thin larder. He waited until they were in bed and
becoming aroused before breaking the news to her that he'd had no
chance to buy or borrow any condoms. She protested that the last
thing she wanted at the moment was a baby. He said it would be all
right because he would withdraw before he came. Maybe it didn't
matter anyway, she said, because her period was due any day.
He didn't withdraw, either then, first thing in the morning, or
again in the early afternoon. An hour later he was gone, cycling the
three-hour journey back to his barracks and imminent relocation.
Even as he cycled, one of his sperm was entering his partner's egg,
and by the time he saw her again she was experiencing pregnancy
sickness. A few months later, during the hottest week in March for
twenty years, his son was born.
Fifty years later, the woman would have seven grandchildren, the
soldier six-one from his daughter, and five from the son conceived
when he was home for that day in June.
ach of the three scenes in this chapter deals with a situation in
which a different woman appears in some way to fail. Yet in
failing, each actually benefits — as if her failure were strategic. In
Scene 15 we encounter a woman who is apparently convinced that
the last thing she wants is to conceive. However, not only does she
fail to avoid conception, but her body goes to some lengths to make
sure that she does. Fifty years later it is clear that her body had
engineered a very successful failure — a real bonus in her pursuit of
reproductive success.
The conscious reason that this woman allowed unprotected sex,
even though she didn't want to conceive, was because she thought
conception was unlikely. Her spur-of-the-moment reasoning was
that it was so long since her last period that her next must be due any
day. But as we noted in Scene 2, and as she soon discovered, the
human menstrual cycle is nowhere near as predictable as many
people think.
Just about the only reliable element in the cycle is that once a
woman has ovulated she will menstruate fourteen days later (but see
below). Everything else is highly variable, as her body contrives to
make itself unpredictable to men. Particularly crucial to her strategy
is the tremendous variation in the number of days from the end of
menstruation to ovulation. This variation (which we shall soon
discuss further), however, is only one element in her unpredictability.
Another less well known feature is that even apparently normal
cycles are by no means always fertile: a woman experiencing such
cycles may not in fact be ovulating at all. Scattered among her fertile
cycles, every healthy, fertile woman routinely also has infertile ones.
There are at least three different types of infertile menstrual cycle
— and most women experience them all. In the first type, a woman
neither menstruates nor produces an egg. In the second, she
menstruates normally, but still does not produce an egg. In the third,
she both menstruates and ovulates, but curtails (from fourteen days
to about ten) the normally consistent interval from ovulation to
menstruation. This curtailment prevents a fertilised egg from
implanting.
In the short term, phases of infertility are an important method by
which a woman's body subconsciously seeks to do two things: on the
one hand, to confuse men; and on the other, to organise the number
and spacing of children over a lifetime. Only if such infertile phases
persist for long periods, such as several years, might they indicate a
problem. Even then, they may still be part of a woman's natural
subconscious ability to plan her family.
The proportion of cycles that are fertile varies in a fairly
predictable way throughout a woman's life. Obviously, she does not
ovulate during childhood, though she may ovulate before having her
first period. And even once she has begun to have periods, few
cycles are fertile. By the age of twenty, a normal, healthy woman
produces an egg in fewer than half of her cycles. Even at her peak,
when around thirty years old, still only about 80 per cent of cycles
are fertile. After thirty, the proportion begins to decline, slowly at
first, then rapidly after she reaches forty.
106 107
ESPERM WARS
By fifty, women more or less cease to ovulate, though there are
unconfirmed reports of women giving birth up to the age of seventy.
What seems to happen in each cycle is that in the days after the
beginning of a period, a woman's body goes through a series of
hormonal changes. These changes prepare her body to produce an
egg but, about one or two days before ovulation can occur, her body
goes on hold. Whether she eventually produces an egg or not
depends on the events of the following few days, or even weeks.
This holding period is an opportunity to collect sperm, perhaps just
from her partner, perhaps not — perhaps just from one man, perhaps
from two or more. In part, whether or not she ovulates will depend
on how her body feels about the man or men from whom she has
collected sperm. Most of all, however, it will depend on how it feels
about trying to produce a baby in the current circumstances.
The woman in Scene 15 thought her next period must soon be due
because it was so long since her last one. She was wrong. Her body
was on hold. In the absence of her partner for the foreseeable future,
it had momentarily considered collecting sperm from another man.
But when it collected sperm from her partner, it responded by
producing an egg. Consciously, the woman thought it was a bad
time to conceive, but her body knew better. Given that it was eight
years since she had last conceived and that her ability to have and
raise a third child would soon begin to decline, now was precisely
the time to conceive — especially as it was June.
Many mammals, such as squirrels, sheep and bears, breed only at
a particular time of year. This way, their bodies can time giving
birth and raising young to coincide with the best weather and the
greatest availability of food. In contrast, most of the larger monkeys
and apes, living in more uniform tropical environments, will breed
at any time of year. Nevertheless, conceptions and births are not
evenly spread throughout the seasons: more still occur in some
months than in others. Humans are just the same.
108
SUCCESSFUL FAILURE
At the latitude of Britain and Canada, more babies are born in
early spring (February and March) than at any other time of year.
There is a second, smaller peak in early autumn (September). At the
latitude of Central America, more babies are born at the coolest time
of year (December/January). In the southern hemisphere, the birth
seasons are the same as in the northern. But the months, of course,
are half a year different.
Just as these seasonal birth peaks reflect peaks of conception nine
months earlier, so do these peaks of conception reflect peaks of
ovulation. Suppose Scene 15 was set in Britain. There, women are
more likely to produce an egg in May/June and December than in
any other month of the year. If the scene had been enacted in
October rather than June, the outcome might have been very
different. In October, even if the woman's body had been on hold,
she might not have responded to intercourse by ovulating. But it was
June. Moreover, she was thirty-four years old, it was eight years
since she last conceived, and her body rarely had the chance to
collect sperm. Despite what her brain might have thought, her body
decided on that summer day that it was actually a very good moment
to conceive — and it was right.
Fifty years later, her son had not only survived, he had given her
five grandchildren. The average number for women living at her time
and in her society is likely to have been four. Without her son, she
would have had only two grandchildren, half the average. Because
she had had her son, she achieved seven grandchildren in all, nearly
twice the average, giving her every chance that her descendants
would be present in the generations to come.
The man, of course, did not fare quite as well as the woman from
their partnership. But he still fared quite well, and for him the son
was even more important — without him, he would have had only
one grandchild. Then there would have been a very real danger that
accident or infertility would rob him of all descendants within a
generation or two (Scene 1). Because he had had his son, he too
achieved an above-average number of grandchildren. So from the
point of view of his reproductive
109SPERM WARS
success it had been a good decision to take on this woman, despite
the cost of raising her daughter from another man. It had also been a
good decision to take on a three-hour cycle ride in the heat of that
June day.
SCENE 16
The Stress of It All
As the woman fingered the piece of paper in her hand, tears began to
roll down her cheeks. Ironically, only yesterday she had thought that
things couldn't get any worse.
Seven years ago, when she and her partner had first started living
together, the future had looked bright. But, somehow, it had all gone
wrong. Maybe they shouldn't have overstretched themselves
financially with their first house. Maybe they shouldn't have spent so
much on holidays and entertainment in the first few years together.
Maybe they should have seen the danger signs earlier and drawn in
their horns when they began to slip into debt. But her partner had
insisted they could manage. Promotion and solvency were always
just around the corner. But now, seeing this final demand, she
realised things were never going to get better. As she sobbed, it
seemed to her as if life had been one long chapter of stress and
unhappiness.
It had begun ten years ago. In her late teens she had become
involved with a brilliant young man. But their relationship was
fraught. He had been continually critical of her body and general
appearance and had refused on principle to use, or allow her to use,
any forms of contraception other than rhythm and withdrawal.
Haunted by the fear of pregnancy and obsessed by the fear of
becoming fat, she had lapsed into anorexia. After a year of despair,
she finished with him, counselled herself out of her eating problems,
and eventually qualified with distinction for the career she had
always wanted. Two years later, she
SUCCESSFUL FAILURE
met her current partner and they began living together almost
immediately.
For four years, they had always been able to find an excuse to wait
'just another month or so' before having a family. More than anything,
they were waiting for his promotion — but it never came. Eventually,
despite their financial problems, they decided to wait no longer. Part
of her motivation had stemmed from her secret hope that a family
would draw them back together again — because as their debts had
mounted so their relationship had deteriorated. More and more
frequently, irritability had begun to give way to open hostility.
To her dismay, she hadn't conceived. Month after month went by,
and she began to worry that she was infertile. As it turned out, her
fears were unfounded. But it took nearly a year of unprotected sex
before, relaxing on a holiday they couldn't afford, she eventually
conceived. Then, nearly three months later, her partner lost his job
and within a week she miscarried.
From that tragic moment, their lives had gone from bad to worse.
The house was repossessed and they were forced to move from one
rented accommodation to another. With each move, as they struggled
to manage on her income, they lowered their sights and their standard
of living. Their current flat was cramped. Although pleasant enough
in summer, it was cold, damp and mouldy in winter. Eventually, her
partner had got another job, less well paid than the first but at least
with prospects. By then, however, they were so far in debt they had
no choice but to stay in their cheap flat, waiting for financial
recovery.
During the worst of their deprivations they rarely had sex, and
whole months sometimes passed without intercourse. With her
partner's new employment, however, their sexual interest in each
other returned. But it was now two years since her miscarriage, and
still she had not conceived. Their finances were slowly improving, but
their standard of living was still far worse than they had originally
expected it would be by now. They still
110 111SPERM WARS SUCCESSFUL FAILURE
argued frequently, sometimes violently, and often had bouts of illhealth.
Suddenly, she stopped crying, screwed up the paper and threw it at
the wall. Her mind was made up. She scribbled a note to her partner
and walked out of the door. At the end of the street, she went into a
telephone kiosk and dialled a familiar number. When the man
answered, she gave him the message he had been waiting all month to
hear: if his offer was still open, she was ready to leave her partner and
move in with him.
Ten minutes later, she was in his car. Thirty minutes after that,
they were in his house in the suburbs. Ever since their affair began,
he had been trying to persuade her to move in. His house was nothing
special, but compared to the pit in which she was living it was a
palace. Although maintenance payments to his ex-partner were a
drain, he was not in debt, his house was warm, dry and well
appointed, and he had a car.
She spent most of the day in tears and most of the night having
sex. The next morning, she went back to her flat to collect her
belongings. Her new partner wanted to accompany her, but she
wouldn't let him and took a taxi instead. Her ex-partner was in bed
when she arrived. As she collected her clothes and other possessions,
the arguments and recriminations reverberated around the bedroom.
He eventually collapsed in tears. Then, begging her not to go, he told
her how much he still cared for her.
She responded in a way that later she still could not believe. As he
sobbed, she suddenly remembered the athletic, ambitious and
arrogant young man she had once found so attractive. In a flood of
compassion, she comforted him, calmed him, then positively
encouraged him to have intercourse with her. However, almost
immediately afterwards, she turned on him again, announced it was
still over, and left.
Over the next few weeks, she settled into her new relationship.
Sexually, they were very active — until she began to feel
sick every morning. Having told her new partner she was infertile, it
was a surprise to both of them to discover she was pregnant. They had
no idea when it had happened until a routine scan told her the baby's
age. Then they calculated that she had conceived the very first week
they had begun to live together.
Her ex-partner refused to leave them in peace, and from time to
time throughout her pregnancy caused great stress. The baby
threatened to miscarry on several occasions, but this time she hung on
to it. In due course she gave birth, albeit slightly prematurely, to a
small but otherwise healthy daughter. Now her ex-partner became
even more demanding, claiming the child to be his. Surrounded by
conflict, the woman lapsed into a deep post-natal depression and
began to neglect and even to mistreat the baby. It might have died had
her new partner not devoted himself to its protection and care, losing
his job in the process. The woman returned to work, leaving her new
partner to take the major role in raising the child.
Her ex-partner faded from their lives for a while. The woman
emerged from her depression, her new partner found employment
again, and they were able to afford child care. Then, just as her life
was settling into a comfortable routine for the first time in years, her
ex-partner reappeared. Now with a good job and rejuvenated
physically, mentally and financially, he wanted to press his claim for
the baby he insisted was his daughter. He paid for a paternity test. The
new partner cooperated, confident that the results would end the
argument once and for all. They did, but not in the way he had hoped.
He was devastated. The baby girl he had cared for so much was not in
fact his daughter.
Within weeks of the result, the woman left to share her old
partner's new and much improved lifestyle, taking her daughter with
her. From then on, the woman's fortunes went from strength to
strength and within three years of their reunion she and her original
partner had two more children.
112 113SPERM WARS SUCCESSFUL FAILURE
n Scene 15, we met a woman who enhanced her reproductive
success by conceiving when, consciously, the last thing she
wanted was another child. In this scene we meet the converse — a
woman who enhances her reproductive success by failing to conceive
when consciously she really wants to.
Most people think of family planning and contraception as modern
inventions. They are not. Even 'deliberate' contraception is not that
new. For centuries, women in various cultures have been placing
leaves or fruit (even crocodile dung!) in their vaginas in an attempt to
avoid conception. Chemical contraception, as in the pill, isn't even a
human invention. Female chimpanzees, for example, at appropriate
times chew leaves that contain contraceptive chemicals. In fact, the
female body was planning families and avoiding conception for tens
of millions of years before humans had even evolved. Women simply
inherited these natural traits from their mammalian ancestors.
For women and all other mammals, the natural mediator between
bad conditions and the avoidance of reproduction is stress. The stress
reaction usually seems like an enemy — a pathological condition that
we cannot shake off and that prevents us from functioning efficiently
and normally. But there is another interpretation: that the stress
reaction is a friend — a means by which the body prevents itself from
doing anything disadvantageous when times are bad. In particular,
stress is a powerful contraceptive. And, to a woman, the avoidance of
conception is an invaluable ally in her pursuit of reproductive
success! How can this be?
The key paradox is that a woman does not necessarily achieve
greatest reproductive success simply by having as many children as
possible as quickly as possible. The very fact that women, like most
primates, usually have only one child at a time is testimony to the
dangers and difficulties of trying to raise more than one child
simultaneously. Twins might seem a good way of increasing
reproductive success, but there is more than twice the danger that both
will die. Unless the woman's circumstances are very favourable, she is
less likely to raise two healthy, fertile children by conceiving twins
than she is by conceiving two children a few years apart.
Women inherited a basic problem from their primate ancestors —
it is very difficult to carry more than one child at a time when walking
long distances. This difficulty is particularly great when walking
upright on two legs, and has plagued women throughout human
evolution — it is not totally unfamiliar even to those living in modern
industrial societies. Of course, the limitation was, and still is,
particularly crucial in those cultures in which women are responsible
for collecting and carrying large quantities of food, water, firewood,
or other materials. Carrying even one child as well is difficult. Under
such circumstances, the greatest reproductive success is achieved by
those who avoid having another child until the previous one can not
only walk but can keep up.
The time interval between successive children is not the only
aspect of 'family planning' that influences a woman's reproductive
success. Children are most likely to survive and grow into healthy,
fertile adults if they are born into a favourable environment. Plenty of
space and an adequate supply of healthy, nutritious food are
paramount. Children then have the lowest risk of contracting diseases
and the greatest resistance to those they do get. In modern societies,
space and nutrition depend on wealth. Even now, the chances of a
child from a poor family dying before reproducing are double those of
a child from a rich family. In the historical and evolutionary past —
when wealth will have been measured not in terms of money but in
terms of crops and livestock, or even simply in terms of access to the
best areas for food, water and shelter — these differences will have
been even greater.
There is a general principle, considered briefly in Scene 8 in
connection with the benefits and dangers of a 'one-child' family:
namely, that for any given woman in any particular situation there
114 115
ISPERM WARS SUCCESSFUL FAILURE
will be a size of family which will give her the greatest number of
grandchildren. If she has a smaller family than this, she will naturally
have fewer grandchildren. Equally, if she tries to have a larger
family, she risks an overcrowded household and spreading herself
and her resources too thinly. The resulting disease and infertility
again mean that she ends up with fewer grandchildren. The challenge
that faces every woman is first to identify the optimum family size
for her circumstances, then to ensure that she has that number of
children. Another factor that influences the number of grandchildren
a woman may have is how she times her conceptions. Life is a
mosaic of situations. Health, wealth and circumstance vary with time,
and some periods in a woman's life are better for having children
than others. Those who time their conceptions to coincide with the
good times will produce the most grandchildren.
It is not just the children who may suffer from being conceived
when times are bad — the mother may suffer also. An untimely
conception may damage her health and situation so much that she
may never again be able to conceive. If the woman in Scene 16 had
produced a child during any of the most stressful phases in her
relationships, she could have suffered irrevocable damage (the
demands of a child when a couple can scarcely maintain themselves
may even be fatal). Under such strained circumstances, there is an
increased risk of ill-health and subsequent infertility. Hostility also
increases, making physical abuse or even murder more likely. The
woman in the scene, by delaying her first child until circumstances
improved, managed, eventually, to have three children for whom she
had the space, time and resources. In the end, she also had the
support of an able partner. Had she tried to reproduce earlier, she
might not only have failed but might also have forfeited her chances
of conceiving in the future.
The best method of avoiding conception is, of course, sexual
abstinence, and the woman and her partner did indeed have spells
without sex in their most stressful days. This happened not because
they consciously wanted to avoid conception — on
the contrary — but because they lost interest in each other. At times,
they even felt hostile. Their bodies were manipulating their emotions
to reduce the chances of conception. Rarely, however, did they give
up routine sex for long. This is because abstinence is in general
disadvantageous as an overall contraception strategy — for the
following reasons.
As we discussed in Scene 2, the primary function of routine sex is
not conception: it is for the woman to confuse the man — and it is for
the man to protect himself against his partner's infidelity by
maintaining a sperm army inside her. Since neither partner can afford
to give up routine sex for too long, both men and women have
mechanisms other than abstinence which, despite continued sexual
activity, reduce the chances of conception when the situation is
unfavourable.
Women in particular have a wide range of such mechanisms. One
of these is widely known: the influence of lactation on ovulation. If a
woman breast-feeds her baby for a few months after giving birth, she
is unlikely to ovulate during that time. This is the case even if she
resumes her periods. Absence of ovulation is one of the main ways in
which a mother spaces the conception of successive children.
However, most of the ways in which she avoids reproducing at
inappropriate times involve stress. In Scene 16, not only did the
woman avoid conception during her most stressful phases, she also
miscarried, then later threatened the life of her new-born baby, in
response to stress.
The stress reaction manifests itself in many ways. In the scene,
faced with a difficult relationship during adolescence, the woman
lapsed into anorexia, as do 1 per cent of girls between sixteen and
eighteen years of age. The physiological stress caused by such nearstarvation is contraceptive — ovulation, and often menstruation, are
inhibited. Usually the situation is temporary. Although a few
anorexics (5-10 per cent) die as a result of their behaviour and a few
more (15-20 per cent) continue to be anorexic throughout their lives,
the majority (75 per
116 117SPERM WARS SUCCESSFUL FAILURE
cent) emerge from the condition to live a normal, healthy and
eventually reproductive life.
Most contraceptive reactions are less extreme than anorexia. Even
so, the more a woman is stressed the less likely she is to ovulate
(Scene 15). She is also less likely to help sperm reach the egg or to
allow a fertilised egg to implant in her womb. Finally, she is more
likely to miscarry, particularly during the first three months of
pregnancy.
It is estimated that, whereas most fertilised eggs survive to reach
the womb, on average about 40 per cent fail to implant and, of the
remainder, about 60 per cent die before the twelfth day of pregnancy.
Even then, about 20 per cent are miscarried during the next three
months. All of these figures are higher if a woman is stressed, lower
if she is not. The death of a partner, a partner's infidelity, or the
outbreak of war, for example, are all known to increase the chances
of miscarriage. During the first few months, miscarriage is also more
likely if there is anything wrong with the baby, either genetically or
developmentally.
At first, it might seem odd that a woman has so many different
ways of avoiding having a child. Certainly, if any one of these
systems were efficient, there would seem no need for others. But this
apparent excess of responses is not an error in female programming.
Circumstances change, often quickly, and a woman's body needs to
respond equally quickly. For example, circumstances may be
favourable when she ovulates but no longer so by the time the egg
reaches her womb. So she will ovulate, but then avoid implantation.
Or circumstances may be favourable at the time of implantation but
may become unfavourable a month or so later. So, having become
pregnant, she miscarries.
Even if circumstances remain favourable throughout early
pregnancy, they may yet deteriorate before the baby is born. The last
three months of pregnancy are often associated with marked changes
in a woman's psychology. First, there are the well known spells of
'nest-building' — strong urges to prepare the environment into which
the baby will be born. Also there are spells of
intense reappraisal — primary targets are her partner, home and
general environment. These spells often manifest themselves as
phases of worry, depression and irritability. Finally, there is often a
preoccupation with the future. Any major deterioration in a woman's
circumstances at this time can lead to pathological depression and the
later rejection, or even abuse, of the baby.
Post-natal depression as an irresistible urge to abandon, abuse or
even kill a new baby is widely recognised. So widely, in fact, that
many legal systems around the world accept that a woman may not
be responsible for her actions in the phase immediately after giving
birth.
Throughout human history infanticide has been, and still is, one of
the major forms of family planning employed by women. In huntergatherers, people who live by hunting and foraging rather than by
cultivation, about 7 per cent of children are killed by their mother.
According to the World Health Organisation, infanticide was the
most prevalent form of family planning in late-nineteenth-century
Britain.
Such behaviour is not restricted to humans. Like all the other
forms of natural family planning, we inherited infanticide from our
mammalian ancestors. Anybody who has kept pets such as rabbits,
gerbils, hamsters or mice will know that if the mother is at all stressed
soon after giving birth, she is likely to kill, even eat, some or all of
her litter. Such infanticide is not pathological: it reflects the mother's
subconscious decision not to raise the litter in the current
circumstances. She opts instead to delay her attempt until
circumstances improve.
So far, we have concentrated on family planning from the woman's
viewpoint. But men, too, have many of the same problems. They
direct a large part of their reproductive effort into preparing an
environment for their children. During hard times, a man should want
to avoid raising children just as much as his partner.
Most of the time, a couple's interests coincide. The woman's body
will plan their family to their mutual benefit. But there are times
when their interests do not coincide. Then, a man needs
118 119SPERM WARS SUCCESSFUL FAILURE
a contraceptive mechanism of his own. Interests are most likely to
conflict when the couple's circumstances are almost, but not quite,
good enough to have a child. In this situation, if the woman meets
someone her body deems to be genetically superior to her partner, she
may be tempted into trying to have a child with another man. In such
circumstances, discussed further in Scene 18, the reproductive benefit
to the woman of a child with this other man would be worth the risk
of overstretching her and her partner's resources. Obviously, her
partner would gain no such benefit.
For him, this is a dangerous and delicate turn of events. Somehow,
he has to prevent the situation just described from happening. At the
same time, he has to avoid impregnating his partner himself. Without
knowing it, the man in Scene 16, the woman's original partner, was in
this situation in the weeks before her desertion. The only option for
such a man is to use routine sex to prevent his partner from
conceiving to anybody, himself included. And men have a very
sophisticated mechanism by which they can do just that: they wage
war on their own sperm.
There are two types of sperm in a man's ejaculate which strongly
reduce the chances of conception if they are present in large numbers.
It seems that these sperm might actually be programmed to destroy a
man's own egg-getters. One of them has a cigar-shaped head and is
called a tapering sperm. The other has a pear-shaped head and is
called a pyriform sperm. Just as for women, stress is contraceptive.
When men are stressed, they produce much greater numbers of these
so-called family-planning sperm.
The more family-planning sperm and the fewer egg-getters a man
introduces into his partner, the lower the chances that she will
conceive. But if she is unfaithful and sperm warfare occurs, her
partner's family-planning sperm can help his conventional killers
overcome the other man's egg-getters. Furthermore if, despite the
partner's efforts, an egg-getter does get through, there is at least a
chance that the child will be his. Had he
responded to stress by abstaining from routine sex, there would be no
such chance.
In Scene 16 this strategy worked successfully for the woman's first
partner. He managed to prevent her becoming pregnant throughout
her weeks of infidelity. But when, eventually, she conceived, he was
the victor in the sperm war she had promoted.
As we have now seen, the bodies of both men and women have a
range of natural methods, mainly triggered by stress, by which they
avoid having children when times are bad. We might expect,
therefore, that societies living in generally more stressful situations
would have fewer children. But they do not — in fact, exactly the
opposite is true. How is this possible?
The explanation is that the factors that influence the best number of
children to have are different from the factors that influence the best
time to have those children. Historically and geographically, the
number of times a woman gives birth in her lifetime is linked closely
to the chances of her children surviving to adulthood. When survival
prospects are poor, a woman gives birth to many children. If she does
not, few or none may survive to adulthood. She avoids having
children during only the very worst times, and conceives whenever
circumstances show signs of improving. In contrast, as we saw
earlier, when survival prospects are good a woman gives birth to
fewer children and lavishes much more of her time and resources on
each. Her effort is less likely to be wasted because each child's chance
of survival is high. Again, she avoids having children during bad
times and only conceives when circumstances are really favourable.
In all of these situations, stress is the contraceptive. But because
women in different circumstances have different expectations, they
are stressed by different levels of deprivation. Circumstances which
would stress a woman in the suburbs of Western Europe or North
America would not stress a woman living in a drainpipe in the Third
World. It is a woman's expectation of living standard that determines
the number of children she attempts to have. Whatever her
expectation, as circumstances fluctuate and her expectations are
exceeded or disappointed,
120 121SPERM WARS SUCCESSFUL FAILURE
stress comes and goes. As it does so, it influences just when she has
each child as she strives to reach her preferred total.
Small families are not a new invention. For most of human history,
from about one million years ago until as recently as ten to fifteen
thousand years ago, all people lived as hunter-gatherers. Men hunted
animals and women foraged for fruit and vegetables. Societies were
made up of small, scattered bands of people. They had a good,
protein-rich diet and most deaths were due to accident, predation and
inter-group warfare rather than disease. The children of huntergatherers had an excellent chance of survival. Using nothing but the
natural, stress-related methods we have discussed, women gave birth
to only three or four children in their lifetime. Of these, two or three
survived.
Large families did not appear until about ten thousand years or so
ago, when agriculture brought a change of lifestyle. In the most
fertile areas, large and concentrated communities developed, living
on a carbohydrate-rich diet. Disease and infant mortality were rife.
The average number of children was about seven or eight, but double
figures were commonplace. Even so, whole families could be wiped
out in days by virulent disease. As with the hunter-gatherers, on
average, only two or three in each survived.
With the advent of 'modernisation', the infant mortality rate began
to fall and so, too, a few decades later, did the birth rate. In Western
Europe this decline in birth rate was again the product of natural
family planning, for it preceded by up to a century the availability
and use of modern contraception. So this reduction in family size to
the levels found in modern industrial societies was due not to
improved contraception technology, but to women subconsciously
planning smaller families in response to the improved survival
prospects of their children.
Many women will read this discussion of natural family planning
with some cynicism, wondering how, if their bodies are so wonderful
at family planning, they managed to conceive at precisely the time
they least wanted. This is yet another
example of the conflict between the conscious brain and the
subconscious body.
As we have repeatedly seen, a woman's body may interpret its
circumstances very differently from her brain. We encountered this
conflict in Scene 15, in which the woman thought the last thing she
wanted in the middle of wartime was to conceive. Nevertheless, her
body actually went out of its way to become pregnant. In that
instance, the body was proved right and the woman achieved most of
her reproductive success through the son 'mistakenly' conceived on
that occasion.
It would, of course, be wrong to conclude that the body is always
right. No body is programmed to respond perfectly to every situation.
The very fact that in every generation some people achieve a greater
reproductive success than others indicates that some bodies make
more mistakes than others. Quite possibly, though, bodies make fewer
mistakes than brains. Yet recently, brains have been given greater
power in this question of contraception. Modern contraceptives, such
as the pill and the cap, at first sight would seem to take the control of
conception away from the body and hand it much more firmly to the
brain. But this change in control may not, as we have seen, influence
the total number of children a woman may have. Rather, modern
contraceptive methods supplement a woman's natural mechanisms by
helping her to control when she has her children — and with whom,
as we shall see in the next scene.
122 123SPERM WARS SUCCESSFUL FAILURE
SCENE 17
How Forgetful
As the taxi pulled up, the woman heard her partner opening the front
door. She listened as he came back into the house and picked up his
bags. Holding her breath, she waited to see if he would come back
into the room to say goodbye. But the front door closed, more loudly
than usual, and he walked to the taxi without looking back. He would
be gone for four weeks, and they were parting on bad terms.
They had been arguing on and off for a year now, and nearly
always about the same thing. He wanted another child — preferably a
son — but she didn't. She had been under pressure to come off the pill
ever since the younger of their two daughters had started school. Now
in her early thirties, the woman wanted to return to her career. Over
the past few months, her partner had become increasingly
disillusioned with his job and recently he had been ill. His
disillusionment seemed to have stripped him of his health and energy
and he had been off work for six weeks, returning only a month ago.
Those six weeks had been a nightmare. She knew that what he
really needed to speed his recovery was peace and quiet but, in spite
of herself, she just could not oblige. It irritated her, having him under
her feet all day while she ferried the children to and from school, did
the shopping and maintained the house. He had insisted on sitting
around downstairs instead of keeping out of her way in bed. Try as
she might, she could not avoid showing her irritation, and arguments
were frequent. They had even argued over the new window-cleaner.
He was a young man, earning money over the summer to help finance
his place on some tropical expedition. Good-looking, confident
and flirtatious, he had once commented on the bikini she was wearing
in the garden. Her partner had overheard and accused her of making a
pass at the young man.
Despite his return to work, their relationship had failed to improve.
Early in the month she had vomited on and off for two days, and had
been so worried in case she had lost the contraceptive protection of
her pill that she had insisted on him using a condom. He had sulked
all month. Then, last night, he had wanted unprotected sex — a
gesture from her to him to see him through his four weeks away from
her. She had refused, and they hadn't spoken since. Now he was gone,
bad feeling unresolved. The day after he left, two things happened.
She finished her current month's supply of the pill and she received
an apologetic long-distance phone call from her partner. They made
up over the phone as best they could. Then, over the next few days,
they returned to their normal long-distance relationship, exchanging
platitudes of concern and affection.
It happened just a week into his trip. It was mid-morning and she
had just returned home from taking their two daughters to school and
doing the shopping. Just as she had finished showering and drying her
hair, the door-bell rang. She pulled on her bath robe and went to the
door, to be confronted by her partner's immediate superior from work.
He had called round to see if she had heard from her partner recently
— because he hadn't. He had tried to phone her but had got no reply
and, because there was an urgent message about a change of itinerary,
he had decided to call round. She invited him in and, after they had
discussed the reason for his call, politely offered him a coffee.
They had met socially a few times before. Once, much to the
irritation of their respective partners, they had indulged in a flirtatious
conversation at a drunken New Year's party. He reminded her of that
night, and they laughed. Gradually, their conversation turned to the
problems they were each having with their respective partners. She
didn't notice what triggered her first flutter of sexual excitement as
she busied herself with
124 125SPERM WARS SUCCESSFUL FAILURE
percolator and cups in the kitchen. All she knew was that at some
point she became aware that only her hastily tied bath robe separated
her body from his eyes and that he was watching her intently, waiting
for glimpses of her nakedness. As the excitement took hold of her,
she found excuses to touch his arms and back as she moved around in
the kitchen. She laughed exaggeratedly at his comments and
contrived reasons for bending and twisting in front of him, pretending
not to notice as her robe loosened and the bulge in his trousers grew.
When the drinks were ready, they went into the sitting-room. She
sat opposite him, breasts scarcely covered. Conversation became
strained as they each waited for a sign that they would not be
rebuffed. In a final move, she lifted her legs on to the chair, deftly
pushing her bath robe between her legs to cover herself. Then, over
the next few minutes, she watched his eyes flick backwards and
forwards between her face and her genitals as she allowed her bath
robe slowly to slip away, giving him an open display of her vulva.
Minutes later they were having intercourse on the floor and ten
minutes after that he had gone, suddenly embarrassed by what had just
happened but telling her that her body had been irresistible.
This event began a week that in later life would seem to her like a
scene from a film — a very bad film. Surely it couldn't have been her
doing all of those things — acting out such clichéd events. At the
time, though, she had simply seemed driven by some powerful force
deep inside her. As the week progressed, she was to have many
moments of fear — fear that somehow her partner would find out
what she had done and fear that she had caught something. When,
two days after this first infidelity, she realised she had forgotten to
start her new pack of pills on time, she also feared that she might be
pregnant. But for most of the week that had just begun, she was simply
to feel a height of sexual restlessness and excitement that she hadn't
experienced in years — and would never experience again.
Only an hour after her infidelity, she masturbated. She masturbated
again the next morning. That afternoon, while
sunbathing in the back garden, she heard the young window-cleaner
arrive at the front. She was inside the house and up to her bedroom in
seconds, standing in front of her bedroom mirror, back to the window.
When she saw the reflection of the young man's face appear at the
window, she slowly took off her bikini, then turned to face him.
Feigning surprise at seeing him she waved unconcernedly, then busied
herself with tidying the room, deliberately choosing jobs that involved
much stretching and bending. When he rang the door-bell for his
money, she opened the door naked, 'hiding' her body behind the
frosted-glass door panel. She complained of the heat and, looking
down at her nakedness, laughed that she had no money on her.
Inviting him in while she went to fetch some, she joked that he could
have sex with her instead if he liked.
No more windows were cleaned on her road that afternoon until,
after her best climax during intercourse for years, she left to pick up
the children from school.
She didn't masturbate again that week, but she had sex twice more
with her partner's boss and once more with the young windowcleaner. That weekend, which she spent with her two daughters, it
was as if she suddenly woke up from a dream. The excitement of the
week disappeared, to be replaced by sheer disbelief at what she had
done. On the Monday, she told both lovers that it had been fun but a
mistake, and she was no longer available. The older man was
relieved, the younger man disappointed.
When her partner returned, two weeks later, she told him about
forgetting to start her pills on time but let him have unprotected sex
anyway as a coming-home present. After that, in the days they were
waiting for her period to start, she insisted he wore a condom.
She never did have her period. Three weeks after her partner's return,
a pregnancy test confirmed that she was pregnant. Her partner was
thrilled, even when the child turned out to be another girl. And he
never did find out about his boss and the window-cleaner.
126 127SPERM WARS SUCCESSFUL FAILURE
ost readers will recognise the seduction of the young
window-cleaner as a cliché (as, later, did the main character
in Scene 17 herself). It, or something similar, has been used as a not
very imaginative 'dramatic device' in a multitude of films, plays and
books. If the man involved is not a window-cleaner, he is an
electrician, a plumber, a builder, a TV repair man or (in Britain, the
biggest cliché of all) a milkman. In short, he is any man who has a
legitimate reason for visiting a woman in her home while her partner
is absent.

